Ritual Entertainment was a video game developer established in 1996 by Robert Atkins, Mark Dochtermann, Jim Dosé, Richard 'Levelord' Gray, Michael Hadwin, Harry Miller and Tom Mustaine. Based in Dallas, Texas, Ritual was formerly known as Hipnotic Interactive, during which period they began development of their signature video game SiN.

Members of the Ritual development team have contributed game assets to other titles such as American McGee's Alice, Medal of Honor: Airborne, Tomb Raider: Legend and 25 to Life and are also the creators of "Übertools" for id Tech 3, which has been licensed for a number of other games.

On January 24, 2007, developer MumboJumbo announced the acquisition of Ritual Entertainment. With this acquisition, Ritual's focus on traditional action-oriented games was changed to casual games, essentially "stalling" Ritual's latest game series, SiN Episodes, after releasing only one episode out of a planned nine.

The purchase followed months of departures of several key employees including chief executive officer Steve Nix who became director of business development at id Software, vice president and co-founder Tom Mustaine who left to found Escalation Studios. Several months after the acquisition, community relations manager Steve Hessel left the company to join Splash Damage.

Prior to the announcement, on December 6, 2006, Ritual announced the appointment of Ken Harward as the company's new studio director.

1. Games developed by Ritual Entertainment

Quake Mission Pack: Scourge of Armagon (1. expansion pack) – (1997) (PC) developed as Hipnotic Interactive

SiN – (1998) (PC (Windows and Linux), Linux on PowerPC) both Linux versions ported by Hyperion Entertainment

Heavy Metal: F.A.K.K.² – (2000) (PC (Windows and Linux), Mac (Mac OS and Mac OS X), Dreamcast) Linux version ported by Loki Software, Mac OS Classic version ported by Contraband Entertainment, Mac OS X version ported by The Omni Group

Blair Witch Volume 3: The Elly Kedward Tale – (2000) (PC)

SiN Gold (port) – (2000) (Mac) ported by Contraband Entertainment

Counter-Strike: Condition Zero – (PC) Ritual Entertainment was working on the title in 2002 after Gearbox Software and before Turtle Rock Studios took over in mid-2003

Star Trek: Elite Force II – (2003) (PC)

Legacy of Kain: Defiance – (2003) (PlayStation 2, Xbox, PC) External collaboration with Crystal Dynamics

Delta Force: Black Hawk Down: Team Sabre (expansion) – (2004) (PC)

SiN Episodes: Emergence – (2006) (PC)

1.1. Unreleased

The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers – (PC) cancelled

SiN II publisher demo – (2003) (PC) Ritual Entertainment made a game demo to show potential publishers.

Legacy of Kain: The Dark Prophecy (2004) – cancelled

SiN Episode 2 - Cancelled

2. References

3. External links