The James Tiptree, Jr. Award is an annual literary prize for works of science fiction or fantasy that expand or explore one's understanding of gender. It was initiated in February 1991 by science fiction authors Pat Murphy and Karen Joy Fowler, subsequent to a discussion at WisCon.

1. Background

The award is named for Alice B. Sheldon, who wrote under the pseudonym James Tiptree, Jr. By choosing a masculine nom de plume, having her stories accepted under that name and winning awards with them, Sheldon helped demonstrate that the division between male and female science fiction writing was illusory. Years after "Tiptree" first published science fiction, Sheldon wrote some work under the female pen name "Raccoona Sheldon"; later, the science fiction world discovered that "Tiptree" had been female all along. This discovery led to widespread discussion over which aspects of writing, if any, have an intrinsic gender. To remind audiences of the role gender plays in both reading and writing, the award was named in Sheldon's honor at the suggestion of Karen Joy Fowler.

Fundraising efforts for the Tiptree include publications (two cookbooks), "feminist bake sales", and auctions. (The Tiptree cookbook The Bakery Men Don't See, edited by WisCon co-founder Jeanne Gomoll, was nominated for a 1992 Hugo Award.) Tiptree Award juries traditionally consist of four female jurors and one male juror (the "token man"). The funds are administrated by the "Tiptree Motherboard" (currently consisting of Fowler, Gomoll, Murphy, Ellen Klages, Debbie Notkin, and Jeffrey D. Smith ).

2. Award to the Tiptree Motherboard

In 2011, the Science Fiction Research Association gave its 2011 "Thomas D. Clareson Award for Distinguished Service" to the Tiptree Motherboard. The Clareson Award was presented to the Tiptree Motherboard for “outstanding service activities – promotion of SF teaching and study, editing, reviewing, editorial writing, publishing, organizing meetings, mentoring, and leadership in SF/fantasy organizations.”

3. Anthologies

Selections of the winners, various short listed fiction, and essays have appeared in four Tiptree-related collections, Flying Cups and Saucers (1999) and a series of annual anthologies published by Tachyon Publications of San Francisco. These include:

Flying Cups and Saucers: Gender Explorations in Science Fiction and Fantasy edited by The Secret Feminist Cabal and Debbie Notkin (1999)

The James Tiptree Award Anthology 1 edited by Karen Joy Fowler, Pat Murphy, Debbie Notkin, and Jeffrey D. Smith (2005)

The James Tiptree Award Anthology 2 edited by Karen Joy Fowler, Pat Murphy, Debbie Notkin, and Jeffrey D. Smith (2006)

The James Tiptree Award Anthology 3 edited by Karen Joy Fowler, Pat Murphy, Debbie Notkin, and Jeffrey D. Smith (2007)

4. Winners

Retrospective Award: Motherlines and Walk to the End of the World by Suzy McKee Charnas; The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin; The Female Man and "When It Changed" by Joanna Russ

1991: A Woman of the Iron People by Eleanor Arnason, and White Queen by Gwyneth Jones

1992: China Mountain Zhang by Maureen F. McHugh

1993: Ammonite by Nicola Griffith

1994: "The Matter of Seggri" by Ursula K. Le Guin and Larque on the Wing by Nancy Springer

1995: Waking The Moon by Elizabeth Hand and The Memoirs Of Elizabeth Frankenstein by Theodore Roszak

1996: "Mountain Ways" by Ursula K. Le Guin, and The Sparrow by Mary Doria Russell

1997: Black Wine by Candas Jane Dorsey and "Travels With The Snow Queen" by Kelly Link

1998: "Congenital Agenesis of Gender Ideation" by Raphael Carter

1999: The Conqueror's Child by Suzy McKee Charnas

2000: Wild Life by Molly Gloss

2001: The Kappa Child by Hiromi Goto

2002: Light by M. John Harrison and "Stories for Men" by John Kessel

2003: Set This House In Order: A Romance Of Souls by Matt Ruff

2004: Camouflage by Joe Haldeman and Not Before Sundown by Johanna Sinisalo

2005: Air by Geoff Ryman

2006 The Orphan's Tales: In the Night Garden by Catherynne M. Valente and Half Life by Shelley Jackson; with special recognition for Julie Phillips' biography of James Tiptree, Jr., James Tiptree, Jr.: The Double Life of Alice B. Sheldon

2007 The Carhullan Army by Sarah Hall

2008 The Knife of Never Letting Go by Patrick Ness and Filter House by Nisi Shawl

2009 Cloud and Ashes: Three Winter’s Tales by Greer Gilman and Ōoku: The Inner Chambers by Fumi Yoshinaga

2010 Baba Yaga Laid an Egg by Dubravka Ugresic

2011 Redwood and Wildfire by Andrea Hairston

2012 The Drowning Girl by Caitlin R. Kiernan and Ancient, Ancient by Kiini Ibura Salaam

2013 Rupetta by N. A. Sulway

5. See also

Gender in speculative fiction

Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction

Women in speculative fiction

Women science fiction authors

6. References

7. Further reading

8. External links