Land's End ( or Pedn an Wlas) is a headland and holiday complex in western Cornwall, England. It is the most westerly point of mainland Cornwall and England, is within the Penwith peninsula and is about eight miles (13 km) west-southwest of Penzance at the starting and finishing point of the A30 road.

1. Geography

Land's End has a particular resonance because it is often used to suggest distance. Land's End to John o' Groats in Scotland is a distance of by road and this Land's End to John o' Groats distance is often used to define charitable events such as end-to-end walks and races in the UK.

There are two varieties of granite represented at Land's End. Adjacent to the hotel the granite is coarse-grained with large phenocrysts of orthoclase, sometimes more than in length. To the north, at the First and Last House, there is a finer grained granite with fewer and smaller phenocrysts, and the different granites can be seen from a distance by the smoother weathering of the finer variety. The granite dates to 268–275 million years ago of the Permian period. The contact zone between the Land's End granite pluton and the altered ″country rocks″ is nearby and the Longships Lighthouse, offshore, is built on the country rock. The Longships, a group of rocky islets are just over offshore, and together with the Seven Stones Reef and the Isles of Scilly which lie approximately southwest — are part of the mythical lost land of Lyonesse, referred to in Arthurian literature.

The headland has been designated part of an Important Plant Area, by the organisation Plantlife, for rare species of flora.

2. History

In 1769, the antiquarian William Borlase wrote:

"Of this time we are to understand what Edward I. says (Sheringham. p. 129.) that Britain, Wales, and Cornwall, were the portion of Belinus, elder son of Dunwallo, and that that part of the Island, afterwards called England, was divided in three shares, viz. Britain, which reached from the Tweed, Westward, as far as the river Ex; Wales inclosed by the rivers Severn, and Dee; and Cornwall from the river Ex to the Land's-End". In 1987 Peter de Savary purchased Land’s End for almost £7 million from David Goldstone. He had two new buildings erected and much of the present theme park development was instigated by him. He sold both Land's End and John o' Groats to businessman Graham Ferguson Lacey in 1991. The current owners purchased Land’s End in 1996 and formed a company named Heritage Great Britain PLC. Attractions at the theme park include children's playgrounds and recorded music. Twice a week in August, Land's End hosts 'Magic in the Skies', a night-time firework spectacular with music by British composer Christopher Bond and narrated by actress Miriam Margolyes. Within the complex is the Land's End Hotel.

In May 2012, Land's End received worldwide publicity as the starting point of the 2012 Summer Olympics torch relay.

3. Gallery

File:Land's End, Cornwall, England.jpg|Cliffs at Land's End File:Lands-End-Village.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End File:Lands End Tourist Centre.jpg|The tourist centre at Land's End File:Lands-End.jpg|The Longships lighthouse off Land's End File:Land's End (looking south).jpg|Looking south from Land's End File:Land's End (looking west).jpg|Looking west from Land's End File:Land's End (looking north).jpg|Looking north from Land's End File:Signpost at Land's End.JPG|Signpost at Land's End

4. See also

Land's End Airport

Land's End to John o' Groats

John o' Groats

Sennen, the nearest village

Corrachadh Mòr, the most westerly point in Great Britain

Finisterra

5. References