Project Mercury was the first human spaceflight program of the United States, which ran from 1959 through 1963. The early highlight of the Space Race, its goal was putting a human in Earth orbit, ideally before the Soviet Union. Led by the newly created civilian Space agency NASA, it spanned twenty unmanned developmental missions involving test animals and solo missions completed by six of the seven Mercury astronauts.

The Space Race had commenced with the 1957 launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik 1. This came as a shock to the American public and led to the creation of NASA to consolidate existing U.S. Space exploration efforts. After the successful launch of the Explorer 1 in 1958, manned Space flight became the next goal.

The Soviets struck first, putting cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin's into orbit with Vostok 1 in April 1961. In response, astronaut Alan Shepard was launched into suborbital flight on May 5. Soviet Gherman Titov followed with a day-long orbital flight in August, 1961. The U.S. reached its orbital goal on February 20, 1962, when John Glenn made three trips around the Earth. When the project ended in May 1963, the USA was still behind the Soviet Space program, but the gap was seen as closing.

The cone-shaped one-man Mercury spacecraft was produced by McDonnell Aircraft, and was outfitted with supplies of water, food and oxygen for about one day in a pressurized cabin. Mercury missions were launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, by a modified Atlas D or Redstone rocket. The capsule was fitted with its own small rocket pack in case of a failed booster. The flight was designed to be controlled from the ground via the Manned Space Flight Network, a system of tracking and communications stations; back-up controls were outfitted onboard. Small retrorockets were used to bring the spacecraft out of its orbit, where an integral heat shield would protect the spacecraft from the heat of reentry into Earth's atmosphere. Finally, a parachute would slow the craft for a water landing. Both astronaut and spacecraft were recovered by helicopter deployed from the nearest suitably U.S. Navy ship.

The program name was taken from Roman mythology, where winged-footed Mercury was the fleet god of travel. It is estimated to have cost $ (current prices) and have involved the work of 2 million people. The astronauts were collectively known as the "Mercury Seven" and each spacecraft was named with a "7" at the end for good luck.

After a slow start riddled with humiliating mistakes, the Mercury Project gained popularity, its missions followed by millions on radio and TV around the globe. Its success laid the groundwork for Project Gemini, which put multiple astronauts in a capsule and perfected space docking maneuvers essential for lunar travel, and the subsequent Apollo moon-landing program announced a few weeks after the first manned flight.

1. Creation

Project Mercury was officially approved on October 7, 1958 and publicly announced on December 17. Originally it was called Project Astronaut, but President Dwight Eisenhower thought that it gave too much attention to the pilot. Instead, the name Mercury was chosen from Classical mythology, which had already lent names to rockets like the Greek Atlas and Roman Jupiter for the SM-65 and PGM-19 missiles. It absorbed military projects with the same aim such as the Air Force Man In Space Soonest.

1.1. Background

Following the end of World War II, a nuclear arms race evolved between the US and the Soviet Union to develop long-range missiles. At the same time both sides also developed satellites for gathering weather data, communications, and espionage, mostly in secret. As a result, Americans were shocked when the Soviet Union placed the first satellite into orbit in October 1957, followed by a growing fear that the US was falling into a Missile gap. A month later, the Soviets Sputnik II, putting a dog into orbit. Though the animal was not recovered alive, it was obvious they were striving for manned spaceflight. Unable to disclose details of military Space projects, President Eisenhower ordered the creation of a civilian Space agency in charge of civilian and scientific Space exploration. Based on the NACA, a federal aeronautical research agency, it became known as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. It completed its first goal - putting an American satellite in Space - in 1958; the next was to put a man there.

The limit of Space was defined as an altitude of , and the only way to reach it was by using rocket powered boosters. This created risks for the pilot, including explosion, high g-forces and vibrations during lift off through a dense atmosphere, and temperatures of more than from air compression during reentry.

In Space, the pilot would require a pressurized chamber or Space suit to supply fresh air. While there, they would experience zero gravity, which could potentially cause disorientation. Further potential risks included Space radiation and micrometeoroid strikes, both of which would normally be absorbed in the atmosphere. All seemed possible to overcome: experience from satellites suggested micrometeoroid risk was negligible, and experiments in the early 1950s with simulated weightlessness, high g-forces on humans, and sending animals to the limit of Space, all suggested potential problems could be overcome by known technologies. Finally, reentry was studied using the nuclear warheads of ballistic missiles. As for reentry, it was proposed a blunt, Earth-facing heat shield would create a shock wave that would force most the heat generated to flow around the spacecraft.

1.2. Organization and facilities

T. Keith Glennan had been appointed administrator of NASA with Hugh L. Dryden (last director of NACA) as his deputy from the creation of the agency on October 1, 1958. Glennan would report to the president through the National Aeronautics and Space Council. The group responsible for Project Mercury was NASA's Space Task Group and the goals of the program were to orbit a manned spacecraft around Earth, investigate the pilot's ability to function in Space and to recover both pilot and spacecraft safely. Existing technology and off-the-shelf equipment would be used wherever practical, the simplest and most reliable approach to system design would be followed, and an existing launch vehicle would be employed together with a progressive test program. Spacecraft requirements included: a launch escape system to separate the spacecraft and its occupant from the launch vehicle in case of impending failure; attitude control for orientation of the spacecraft in orbit; a retrorocket system to bring the spacecraft out of orbit; drag braking blunt body for atmospheric reentry; and landing on water. To communicate with the spacecraft during an orbital mission, an extensive communications network had to be built. To begin with President Eisenhower hesitated to give the project top national priority (DX rating), which meant that it had to wait in line behind military projects for materials; however, this rating was granted in May 1959.

Twelve companies bid to build the Mercury spacecraft on a $20 million ($) contract. In January 1959, McDonnell Aircraft Corporation was chosen to be prime contractor for the spacecraft. Two weeks earlier, North American Aviation, based in Los Angeles, was awarded a contract for Little Joe, a small rocket to be used for development of the launch escape system. The World Wide Tracking Network for communication between the ground and spacecraft during a flight was awarded to the Western Electric Company. Redstone rockets for suborbital launches were manufactured in Huntsville, Alabama by the Chrysler Corporation and Atlas rockets by Convair in San Diego, California. For manned launches, the Atlantic Missile Range at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida was made available by the USAF. This was also the site of the Mercury Control Center while the computing center of the communication network was in Goddard Space Center, Maryland. Little Joe rockets were launched from Wallops Island, Virginia. Astronaut training took place at Langley Research Center in Virginia, Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland, Ohio, and Naval Air Development Center Johnsville in Warminster, PA. Langley wind tunnels together with a rocket sled track at Holloman Air Force Base at Alamogordo, New Mexico were used for aerodynamic studies. Both Navy and Air Force aircraft were made available for the development of the spacecraft's landing system, and Navy ships and Navy and Marine Corps helicopters were made available for recovery. South of Cape Canaveral the town of Cocoa Beach boomed. From here, 75,000 people watched the first American orbital flight being launched in 1962.

Wallops Island - GPN-2000-001888.jpg|Wallops Island test facility, 1961 Mercury control center 4june1963.jpg|Mercury Control Center, Cape Canaveral, 1963 File:Gilruth-S69-39595.jpg|Robert R. Gilruth, head of Space Task Group, 1969

2. Spacecraft

The Mercury spacecraft's principal designer was Max Faget, who started research for manned spaceflight during the time of the NACA. It was long and wide; with the launch escape system added overall length was . With of habitable volume, the capsule was just large enough for the single crew member. Inside were 120 controls: 55 electrical switches, 30 fuses and 35 mechanical levers. The heaviest spacecraft, Mercury-Atlas 9, weighed fully loaded . Its outer skin was made of René 41, a nickel alloy able to withstand high temperatures.

The spacecraft was-cone shaped, with a neck at the narrow end. It had a convex base, which carried a heat shield (Item 2 in the diagram below). comprised of an aluminum honeycomb covered with multiple layers of fiberglass. Strapped to it was a retropack (1) consisting of three rockets deployed to brake the spacecraft during reentry. Between these were three minor rockets for separating the spacecraft from the launch vehicle at orbital insertion. The straps that held the package could be severed when it was no longer needed. Next to the heat shield was the pressurized crew compartment (3). Inside an astronaut would be strapped to a form-fitting seat, with instruments in front and his back to the heat shield. Underneath the seat was the environmental control system supplying oxygen and heat., scrubbing the air of CO2, vapor and odors, and (on orbital flights) collecting urine. The recovery compartment (4) at the narrow end of the spacecraft contained three parachutes: a drogue to stabilize free fall and two main chutes, a primary and reserve. Between the heat shield and inner wall of the crew compartment was a landing skirt, deployed by letting down the heat shield before landing. On top of the recovery compartment was the antenna section (5) containing both antennas for communication and scanners for guiding spacecraft orientation. Attached was a flap used to ensure the spacecraft was faced heat shield first during reentry. A launch escape system (6) was mounted to the narrow end of the spacecraft containing three small solid-fueled rockets which could be fired briefly in a launch failure to separate the capsule safely from its booster. It would deploy the capsule's parachute for a landing nearby at sea.

Mercury-spacecraft-color.png|1. Retropack. 2. Heatshield. 3. Crew compartment. 4. Recovery compartment. 5. Antenna section. 6. Launch escape system. McDonnellMercuryCapsule1.jpg|Retropack: Retrorockets with red posigrade rockets Landing-skirt.jpg|Landing skirt principles

2.1. Pilot role

The Mercury astronauts had taken part in the development of their spacecraft and insisted that manual control and a window be elements of its design. Spacecraft movement and other functions could thus be controlled remotely from the ground when passing over a ground station, automatically guided by onboard instruments, or manually by the astronaut, who could replace or override the two other methods.

The astronaut sat with his back to the heat shield in a form-fitted seat molded from his body for maximum support. Near his left hand was a manual abort handle to activate the launch escape system prior to or during liftoff if the automatic trigger failed. To supplement the onboard environmental control system, he wore a pressure suit with its own oxygen supply, which would also cool him. A low pressure atmosphere of pure oxygen was easier to control than one with the same composition as air at ground level. To put out fire, the astronauts had to empty the compartment of oxygen. Should the air pressure of the compartment fail due to puncturing by micrometeoroids or other reasons, the astronaut could still make an emergency return to Earth relying on his suit for survival. The astronauts normally flew with their visor up which meant that the suit was not inflated. With the visor down and the suit inflated, the astronaut could only reach the side and bottom panels where vital buttons and handles were placed. The cabin pressure was equivalent to an altitude of . The astronaut also wore electrodes on his chest to record his heart rhythm, a cuff that could take his blood pressure and a rectal thermometer to record his temperature (this would be replaced by an oral thermometer on the last flight). Data from these was sent to the ground during the flight. For orientation, he could look through the window in front of him or from a screen connected to a periscope which could be turned 360°. The astronaut normally drank water and ate food pellets.

Once in orbit the spacecraft could be rotated in three directions: along its longitudinal axis (roll), left to right as seen from the astronaut (yaw), and up-down (pitch). Movement was created by rocket-propelled thrusters which used hydrogen peroxide as a fuel.

Experience validated the astronauts' insistence on manual controls. Without them, Gordon Cooper's manual reentry during the last flight would not have been possible.

2.2. Development and production

The Mercury spacecraft design was modified three times by NACA/NASA between 1958 and 1959. After bidding by potential contractors had been completed NASA selected in November 1958 the design submitted as "C". After it failed a test flight in July 1959 a final configuration, "D", emerged. The heat shield shape had been developed earlier in the 1950s through experiments with ballistic missiles, which had shown blunt profile would create a shock wave that would lead most of the heat around the spacecraft. To further protect against heat, either a heat sink or an ablative material could be added to the shield. The heat sink would remove heat by the flow of the air inside the shock wave, whereas the ablative heat shield would remove heat by a controlled evaporation of the ablative material. After unmanned tests, the latter was chosen for manned flights. Apart from the capsule design, a rocketplane similar to the existing X-15 was considered. This approach was still too far from being able to make a spaceflight and was consequently dropped. The heat shield and the stability of the spacecraft were tested in wind tunnels and later in flight. The launch escape system was developed through unmanned flights. An alternative concept for landing system involving the use of a glider wing instead of a parachute was considered but ultimately scrapped.

The spacecraft were produced at McDonnell Aircraft, St. Louis, Missouri in clean rooms and tested in vacuum chambers at the McDonnell plant. The spacecraft had close to 600 subcontractors, such as Garrett AiResearch which built the spacecraft's environmental control system. Final quality control and preparations of the spacecraft were made at Hangar S at Cape Canaveral. NASA ordered 20 production spacecraft, numbered 1 through 20. Five of the 20, Nos. 10, 12, 15, 17, and 19, were not flown. Spacecraft No. 3 and No. 4 were destroyed during unmanned test flights. Spacecraft No. 11 sank and was recovered from the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean after 38 years. Some spacecraft were modified after initial production (refurbished after launch abort, modified for longer missions, etc.) A number of Mercury boilerplate spacecraft (made from non-flight materials or lacking production spacecraft systems) were also made by NASA and McDonnell. They were designed and used to test spacecraft recovery systems and the escape tower. McDonnell also built the spacecraft simulators used by the astronauts during training.

Heatshield-test3.jpg|Wind tunnel photo of shock wave, 1957 Mercury-design.png|Development in spacecraft design, 1958–59 Mercury Space Capsule-wind-tunnel.jpg|Experiment with boilerplate spacecraft, 1959

3. Launch vehicles

The Mercury program used two launch vehicles for manned missions. The most important was the Atlas LV-3B or Atlas D, a two-stage liquid fueled rocket used for orbital flight. It was developed by Convair for the Air Force during the mid-1950s and was fueled with liquid oxygen (LOX) and kerosene. It was by itself and with the spacecraft and the launch escape system (including the adapter that held both to the launch vehicle), its total height was . The first stage was a booster skirt with two engines using liquid fuel from the sustainer stage. This together with the larger sustainer stage gave it sufficient power to launch a Mercury spacecraft into orbit. Both stages fired from lift-off until staging of the booster; the sustainer through an opening in the booster. After staging, the sustainer stage continued alone. The sustainer also steered the rocket by thrusters guided by gyroscopes. Smaller vernier rockets were added on its sides for precise control of maneuvers. The Atlas was made of paper-thin stainless steel and had to be kept under constant internal pressure by fuel or helium in order to prevent the rocket from collapsing. This meant that the airframe of the launch vehicle could be reduced to 2% of the weight of the fuel. The Atlas D rocket also required extra strengthening in order to handle the increased weight of the Mercury spacecraft beyond that of the nuclear warheads it was designed for. Its internal guidance system also had to be moved accordingly to its greater length. The Titan missile was also considered for later Mercury missions but was not ready in time. The Atlas was flown to Cape Canaveral and transported to the launch pad on a dolly. At the launch pad, the rocket and dolly were lifted to a vertical position by the service tower and the Atlas was then held by clamps to the launch pad.

The other manned launch vehicle was the Mercury-Redstone Launch Vehicle which was an (spacecraft and escape system included) tall single-stage launch vehicle used for suborbital (ballistic) flights. It had a liquid-fueled engine that burned alcohol and liquid oxygen producing about 75,000 pounds of thrust, which was not enough for orbital missions. It was a descendant of the German V-2, and developed for the U.S. Army during the early 1950s. It was modified for Project Mercury by removing the warhead and adding a collar for supporting the spacecraft together with material for damping vibrations during launch. Its rocket motor was produced by North American Aviation and its direction could be altered during flight by its fins. They worked in two ways: by directing the air around them or by directing the thrust by their inner parts (or both at the same time). Both the Atlas-D and Redstone launch vehicles contained an automatic abort sensing system which allowed them to abort a launch by firing the launch escape system if something went wrong. The Jupiter rocket, a relative of the Redstone, was originally considered for the suborbital launch vehicle, but was replaced by the Redstone in July 1959 due to budget constraints.

A smaller launch vehicle ( long) called Little Joe which carried a Mercury spacecraft with an escape tower mounted on it, was used for unmanned tests of the launch escape system. Its main purpose was to test the system at a point called max-q, at which air pressure against the spacecraft peaked, making separation of the launch vehicle and spacecraft most difficult. It was also the point at which the astronaut was subjected to the heaviest vibrations. The Little Joe rocket used solid-fuel propellant and was originally designed in 1958 by the NACA for suborbital manned flights, but was redesigned for Project Mercury to simulate an Atlas-D launch. It was produced by North American Aviation. It was not able to change direction, instead its flight depended on the angle from which it was launched. Its maximum altitude was fully loaded. A Scout launch vehicle was used for a single flight intended to evaluate the tracking network; however, it failed and was destroyed from the ground shortly after launch.

Little Joe 5B capsule mating.jpg|Mounting of spacecraft on Little Joe airframe at Wallops Island Unloading Atlas Launch Vehicle - GPN-2003-00041.jpg|Unloading Atlas at Cape Canaveral 20130717155518!Mercury-Redstone 4 booster erection 61-MR4-45.jpg|Erection of Redstone at Launch Complex 5 Launch Complex 14-MA-9.jpg|Atlas on launch pad at Launch Complex 14

4. Astronauts

NASA announced the selected seven astronauts – known as the Mercury Seven – on April 9, 1959, they were:

Malcolm Scott Carpenter (1925–2013), USN

Leroy Gordon "Gordo" Cooper, Jr. (1927–2004), USAF

John Herschel Glenn, Jr. (1921–), USMC

Virgil Ivan "Gus" Grissom (1926–1967), USAF

Walter Marty "Wally" Schirra, Jr. (1923–2007), USN

Alan Bartlett Shepard, Jr. (1923–1998), USN

Donald Kent "Deke" Slayton (1924–1993), USAF Shepard became the first American in Space by making a suborbital flight in May 1961. He went on to fly in the Apollo program and became the only Mercury astronaut to walk on the Moon. Gus Grissom, who became the second American in Space, also participated in the Gemini and Apollo programs, but died in January 1967 during a pre-launch test for Apollo 1. Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth in February 1962, then quit NASA and went into politics, but returned to Space aboard STS-95. Deke Slayton was grounded in 1962, but remained with NASA and flew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in 1975. Gordon Cooper became the last to fly in Mercury and made its longest flight, and also flew a Gemini mission. Carpenter's Mercury flight was his only trip into Space.

One of the astronauts' tasks was publicity; they gave interviews to the press and visited project manufacturing facilities to speak with those who worked on Project Mercury. To make their travels easier, they requested and got jet fighters for personal use. The press was especially fond of John Glenn, who was considered the best speaker of the seven. They sold their personal stories to Life magazine which portrayed them as patriotic, God-fearing family men. Life was also allowed to be at home with the families while the astronauts were in Space. During the project, Grissom, Carpenter, Cooper, Schirra and Slayton stayed with their families at or near Langley Air Force Base; Glenn lived at the base and visited his family in Washington DC on weekends. Shepard lived with his family at Naval Air Station Oceana in Virginia.

4.1. Selection and training

It was envisaged that the pilot could be any man or woman willing to take a personal risk. On President Eisenhower's insistence, however, the first Americans to venture into Space were drawn from a group of 508 military test pilots. This excluded women, since there were no female military test pilots. It also excluded the NACA's X-15 pilot and later astronaut Neil Armstrong, since he was a civilian. It was further stipulated that candidates should be between 25 and 40 years old, no taller than , and hold a college degree in science or engineering. The college degree requirement excluded the X-1 pilot Chuck Yeager, the first person to exceed the speed of sound. He later became a critic of the project, ridiculing especially the use of monkeys. Joseph Kittinger, a stratosphere balloonist, met all the requirements but preferred to stay in his contemporary project. Some other potential candidates declined because they did not believe that manned spaceflight had a future beyond Project Mercury. From the original 508, 110 candidates were selected for an interview, and from the interviews, 32 were selected for further physical and mental testing. Their health, vision, and hearing were examined, together with their tolerance to noise, vibrations, g-forces, personal isolation, and heat. In a special chamber, they were tested to see if they could perform their tasks under confusing conditions. The candidates had to answer more than 500 questions about themselves and describe what they saw in different images. Jim Lovell, later astronaut in Gemini and Apollo, did not pass the physical tests. After these tests it was intended to narrow the group down to six astronauts but in the end it was decided to keep seven.

The astronauts went through a training program covering some of the same exercises that were used in their selection. They simulated the g-force profiles of launch and reentry in a centrifuge at the Naval Air Development Center, and were taught special breathing techniques necessary when subjected to more than 6 g. Weightlessness training took place in aircraft, first on the rear seat of a two-seater fighter and later inside converted and padded cargo aircraft. They practiced gaining control of a spinning spacecraft in a machine at the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory called the Multi-Axis Spin-Test Inertia Facility (MASTIF), by using an attitude controller handle simulating the one in the spacecraft. A further measure for finding the right attitude in orbit was star and Earth recognition training in planetaria and simulators. Communication and flight procedures were practiced in flight simulators, first together with a single person assisting them and later with the Mission Control Center. Recovery was practiced in pools at Langley, and later at sea with frogmen and helicopter crews.

File:Johnsville Centrifuge.jpg|G-force training, Johnsville, 1960 File:Mercury Astronauts in Weightless Flight on C-131 Aircraft - GPN-2002-000039.jpg|Weightlessness simulation in a C-131 File:Project Mercury AWT Gimbaling Rig close.jpg|MASTIF at Lewis Research Center File:Shepard in trainer before launch.png|Flight trainer at Cape Canaveral File:B60 285b.jpg|Egress training at Langley

5. Mission profile

Project Mercury had two kinds of missions: suborbital, and orbital. In the suborbital mission, a Redstone rocket lifted the spacecraft for 2 minutes and 30 seconds to an altitude of , separated from it and let it continue on a ballistic curve. Though not necessary for re-entry because orbital speed had not been attained, the spacecraft's retrorockets were fired, and the spacecraft landed in the Atlantic Ocean. Orbital missions also landed in the Atlantic, and a flotation collar, not ready for suborbital missions, was fastened around the spacecraft after landing. The suborbital mission took 15 minutes, had an apogee altitude of , and a downrange distance of .

Preparations for a mission started a month in advance with the selection of the primary and back-up astronaut; they would practice together for the mission. For three days prior to launch, the astronaut went through a special diet to minimize his need for defecating during the flight. On the morning of the trip he typically ate a steak breakfast. After having sensors applied to his body and being dressed in the pressure suit, he started breathing pure oxygen to prepare him for the atmosphere of the spacecraft. He arrived at the launch pad, took the elevator up the launch tower and entered the spacecraft two hours before launch. Once the astronaut was secured inside, the hatch was bolted, the launch area evacuated and the mobile tower rolled back. After this, the launch vehicle was filled with liquid oxygen. The entire procedure of preparing for launch and launching the spacecraft followed a time table called the countdown. It started a day in advance with a pre-count, in which all systems of the launch vehicle and spacecraft were checked. After that followed a 15 hour hold, during which pyrotechnics were installed. Then came the main countdown which for orbital flights started 6½ hours before launch (T – 390 min), counted backwards to launch (T = 0) and then forward until orbital insertion (T + 5 min).

On an orbital mission, the Atlas' rocket engines were ignited 4 seconds before lift-off. The launch vehicle was held to the ground by clamps and then released when sufficient thrust was built up at lift-off (A). After 30 seconds of flight, the point of maximum dynamic pressure against the vehicle was reached, at which the astronaut felt heavy vibrations. The booster engines were cut off and released after 2 minutes and 10 seconds (B). At this point, the launch escape system was no longer needed, and was separated from the spacecraft by its jettison rocket (C). The launch vehicle moved gradually to a horizontal attitude during launch until, at an altitude of , the spacecraft was inserted into orbit (D). This happened after 5 minutes and 10 seconds in a direction pointing east, whereby the spacecraft would gain speed from the rotation of the Earth. Here the spacecraft fired the three posigrade rockets for a second to separate it from the launch vehicle. Just before orbital insertion and sustainer engine cutoff, g-loads peaked at 8 g (6 g for a suborbital flight). In orbit, the spacecraft automatically turned 180°, pointed the retropackage forward and its nose 14.5° downward and kept this attitude for the rest of the orbital phase of the mission, as it was necessary for communication with the ground. Once in orbit, it was not possible for the spacecraft to change its trajectory except by initiating reentry. Each orbit would typically take 88 minutes to complete. The lowest point of the orbit called perigee was at the point where the spacecraft entered orbit and was about , the highest called apogee was on the opposite side of Earth and was about . When leaving orbit (E) the angle downward was increased to 34°, which was the angle of retrofire. Retrorockets fired for 10 seconds each (F) in a sequence where one started 5 seconds after the other. During reentry (G), the astronaut would experience about 8 g (11–12 g on a suborbital mission). The temperature around the heat shield rose to and at the same time, there was a two minute radio blackout due to ionization of the air around the spacecraft. After re-entry, a small, drogue parachute (H) was deployed at for stabilizing the spacecraft's descent. The main parachute (I) was deployed at starting with a narrow opening that opened fully in a few seconds to lessen the strain on the lines. Just before hitting the water, the landing bag inflated from behind the heat shield to reduce the force of impact (J). Upon landing the parachutes were released. An antenna (K) was raised and sent out signals that could be traced by ships and helicopters. Further, a green marker dye was spread around the spacecraft to make its location more visible from the air. Frogmen brought in by helicopters inflated a collar around the craft to keep it upright in the water. The recovery helicopter hooked onto the spacecraft and the astronaut blew the escape hatch to exit the capsule. He was then hoisted aboard the helicopter that finally brought both him and the spacecraft to the ship.

The number of personnel supporting a Mercury mission was typically around 18,000, with about 15,000 people associated with recovery. Most of the others followed the spacecraft from the World Wide Tracking Network, a chain of 18 stations placed around the equator, which was based on a network used for unmanned satellites and made ready in 1960. It collected data from the spacecraft and provided two-way communication between the astronaut and the ground. Each station had a range of and a pass typically lasted 7 minutes. Mercury astronauts on the ground would take part of the Capsule Communicator or CAPCOM who communicated with the astronaut in orbit. Occasionally this communication was broadcast on live TV while the spacecraft was passing over the United States. Data from the spacecraft was sent to the ground, processed at the Goddard Space Center and relayed to the Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral. In the Control Center, the data was displayed on boards on each side of a world map, which showed the position of the spacecraft, its ground track and the place it could land in an emergency within the next 30 minutes.

Mercury profile.jpg|Mercury manned launches Glenn62.jpg|John Glenn in orbit (Mercury-Atlas 6) Mercury Control crop.jpg|alt=A look inside the Mercury Control Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida. Dominated by the control board showing the position of the spacecraft above ground|Inside Control Center at Cape Canaveral (Mercury-Atlas 8) Shepard Hoisted into Recovery Helicopter - GPN-2000-001361-crop.jpg|Recovery seen from helicopter (Mercury-Redstone 3)

6. Flights

On April 12, 1961 the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in Space on an orbital flight. Alan Shepard became the first American in Space on a suborbital flight three weeks later, on May 5, 1961. John Glenn, the third Mercury astronaut to fly, became the first American to reach orbit on February 20, 1962, but only after the Soviets had launched a second cosmonaut, Gherman Titov, into a day-long flight in August 1961. Three more Mercury orbital flights were made, ending on May 16, 1963 with a day-long, 22 orbit flight. However, the Soviet Union ended its Vostok program the next month, with the human spaceflight endurance record set by the 82-orbit, almost 5-day Vostok 5 flight.

6.1. Manned

All of the manned Mercury flights were successful. The main medical problems encountered were simple personal hygiene, and post-flight symptoms of low blood pressure. The launch vehicles had been tested through unmanned flights, therefore the numbering of manned missions did not start with 1. Also, since two different launch vehicles were used, there were two separate numbered series: MR for "Mercury-Redstone" (suborbital flights), and MA for "Mercury-Atlas" (orbital flights). These names were not popularly used, since the astronauts followed a pilot tradition, each giving their spacecraft a name. They selected names ending with a "7" to commemorate the seven astronauts. Mercury-Redstone flights were launched from Launch Complex-5 while the Mercury-Atlas flights were launched from Launch Complex-14. Times given are Universal Coordinated Time, local time + 5 hours.

Kennedy, Johnson, and others watching flight of Astronaut Shepard on television, 05 May 1961.png|Shepard's flight watched on TV in the White House Kearsarge-mercury-3.jpg|USS Kearsarge with crew spelling Mercury-9 Astronaut_John_Glenn_being_Honored_-_GPN-2000-000607.jpg|John Glenn honored by the President

6.2. Unmanned

The unmanned flights used Little Joe, Redstone, and Atlas launch vehicles. They were used to develop the launch vehicles, launch escape system, spacecraft and tracking network. One flight of a Scout rocket attempted to launch an unmanned satellite for testing the ground tracking network, but failed to reach orbit. The Little Joe program used seven airframes for eight flights, of which three were successful. The second Little Joe flight was named Little Joe 6, because it was inserted into the program after the first 5 airframes had been allocated.

File:Launch of Little Joe 1B, January 21, 1960.jpg|Little Joe 1B out of control at launch with Miss Sam, 1960 File:Escape rocket of Mercury-Redstone 1-crop.jpg|Mercury-Redstone 1: launch escape tower lift-off after 4 launch, 1960 File:Chimpanzee Ham in Biopack Couch for MR-2 flight MSFC-6100114.jpg|Mercury-Redstone 2: Ham, 1961 File:Enos-mercury-5.png|Mercury-Atlas 5: Enos, 1961

6.3. Canceled

Suborbital flights were planned for four other astronauts, making Mercury-Redstone 8 the last.

7. Impact and legacy

The project was delayed by 22 months, counting from the beginning until the first orbital mission. It had a dozen prime contractors, 75 major subcontractors, and about 7200 third-tier subcontractors, who together employed two million persons. An estimate of its cost made by NASA in 1969 gave $392.6 million ($ adjusted for inflation), broken down as follows: Spacecraft: $135.3 million, launch vehicles: $82.9 million, operations: $49.3 million, tracking operations and equipment: $71.9 million and facilities: $53.2 million.

Today the Mercury program is commemorated as the first manned American Space program. It did not win the race against the Soviet Union, but gave back national prestige and was scientifically a successful precursor of later programs such as Gemini, Apollo and Skylab. During the 1950s, some experts doubted that manned spaceflight was possible. Still when John F. Kennedy was elected president, many including he had doubts about the project. As president he chose to support the programs a few months before the launch of Freedom 7, which became a great public success. Afterwards, a majority of the American public supported manned spaceflight, and within a few weeks, Kennedy announced a plan for a manned mission to land on the Moon and return safely to Earth before the end of the 1960s. The six astronauts who flew were awarded medals, driven in parades and two of them were invited to address a joint session of the US Congress. As a response to the selection criteria, which ruled out women, a private project was founded in which 13 women pilots successfully underwent the same tests as the men in Project Mercury. It was named Mercury 13 by the media Despite this effort, NASA did not select female astronauts until 1978 for the Space Shuttle.

In 1964, a monument commemorating Project Mercury was unveiled near Launch Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral, featuring a metal logo combining the symbol of Mercury with the number 7. In 1962, the United States Postal Service honored the Mercury-Atlas 6 flight with a Project Mercury commemorative stamp, the first US postal issue to depict a manned spacecraft. The stamp first went on sale in Cape Canaveral, Florida on February 20, 1962, the same day as the first manned orbital flight. On May 4, 2011, the Postal Service released a stamp commemorating the 50th anniversary of Freedom 7, the first manned flight of the project. On film, the program was portrayed in The Right Stuff a 1983 adaptation of Tom Wolfe's 1979 book of the same name. On February 25, 2011, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, the world's largest technical professional society, awarded Boeing (the successor company to McDonnell Aircraft) a Milestone Award for important inventions which debuted on the Mercury spacecraft.

File:Project Mercury Pad14.jpg|Mercury monument at Launch Complex 14, 1964 File:Project_Mercury_4¢_US_Postage_stamp_February_20,_1962_FDC_Scott_-1193.jpg|Commemorative Project Mercury 4¢ US Postage stamp

7.1. Displays

File:Freedom 7 U.S. Naval Academy.JPG|Freedom 7 at the United States Naval Academy, 2010 Liberty Bell 7 The Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center.JPG|Liberty Bell 7 at the Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center, 2010 Friendship 7 the National Air and Space Museum.JPG|Friendship 7 at the National Air and Space Museum, 2009 Aurora 7 the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.JPG|Aurora 7 at the Museum of Science and Industry (Chicago), 2009 MA-8 Sigma 7 Astronaut Hall of Fame, Titusville, FL.JPG|Sigma 7 at the United States Astronaut Hall of Fame, 2011 MA-9 Faith 7 Space Center Houston, Houston, TX.JPG|Faith 7 at Space Center Houston, 2011

7.2. Patches

Commemorative patches were designed by entrepreneurs after the Mercury program to satisfy collectors. Freedom 7 insignia.gif Mercury 4 - Patch.jpg Mercury 6 - Patch.jpg Aurora 7 patch.png Mercury-8-patch.png Mercury 9 - Patch.jpg

8. Graphics

8.1. Astronauts assignments

AstronautAssignmentsChart-Mercury7.PNG|Mercury 7 astronaut assignments. Schirra had the most flights with three; Glenn, though being the first to leave NASA, had the last with a Space Shuttle mission in 1998. Shepard was the only one to walk on the Moon.

8.2. Tracking network

Mercury Tracking Network 2.png|Ground track and tracking stations for Mercury-Atlas 8. Spacecraft starts from Cape Canaveral in Florida and moves east; each new orbit-track is displaced to the left due to the rotation of the Earth. It moves between latitudes 32.5° north and 32.5° south. Key: 1–6: orbit number. Yellow: launch. Black dot: tracking station. Red: range of station; Blue: landing.

8.3. Spacecraft cutaway

Mercury Spacecraft.png|Interior of spacecraft Mercury-spacecraft-control.png|The three axes of rotation for the spacecraft: yaw, pitch and roll

8.4. Control panels and handle

File:Control panels mercury atlas 6.png|The control panels of Friendship 7. The panels changed between flights, among others the periscope screen that dominates the center of these panels was dropped for the final flight. File:Three-axis hand controller mercury project.jpg|3-axis handle for attitude control

8.5. Launch complex

File:Launch-complex-14.png|Launch Complex 14 just before launch (service tower rolled aside). Preparations for launch were made at blockhouse.

8.6. Earth landing system tests

File:Mercury-project-earth-landing-system-test.png|Drop of boilerplate spacecraft in training of landing and recovery. 56 such qualification tests were made together with tests of individual steps of the system. An alternative landing system using a paraglider was proposed but did not get beyond model tests.

9. Notes

10. References

11. Bibliography

12. External links