Marquette is a city in the U.S. state of Michigan and the county seat of Marquette County. The population was 21,355 at the 2010 census, making it the most populated city of the Upper Peninsula. Marquette is a major port on Lake Superior, primarily for shipping iron ore, and is the home of Northern Michigan University. In 2012, Marquette was listed among the 10 best places to retire in the U.S. by CBS Money Watch.

1. History

The land around Marquette was known to French missionaries of the early 17th century and the trappers of the early 19th century. A mission was established at what became Marquette in 1675. Development of the area did not begin, however, until 1844, when William Burt and Jacob Houghton (the brother of geologist Douglass Houghton) discovered iron deposits near Teal Lake west of Marquette. In 1845, Jackson Mining Company, the first organized mining company in the region, was formed.

The village of Marquette began on September 14, 1849, with the formation of a second iron concern, the Marquette Iron Company. Three men participated in organizing the firm: Robert J. Graveraet, who had prospected the region for ore; Edward Clark, agent for Waterman A. Fisher of Worcester, Massachusetts, who financed the company, and Amos Rogers Harlow. The village was at first called New Worcester, with Harlow as the first postmaster. On August 21, 1850, the name was changed to honor Jacques Marquette, the French Jesuit missionary who had explored the region. A second post office, named Carp River, was opened on October 13, 1851 by Peter White, who had come there with Graveraet at age 18. Harlow closed his post office in August 1852. The Marquette Iron Company failed, while its successor, the Cleveland Iron Mining Company, flourished and had the village platted in 1854. The plat was recorded by Peter White. White's office was renamed as Marquette in April 1856, and the village was incorporated in 1859. It was incorporated as a city in 1871.

During the 1850s, Marquette was linked by rail to numerous mines and became the leading shipping center of the Upper Peninsula. The first ore pocket dock, designed by an early town leader, John Burt, was built by the Cleveland Iron Mining Company in 1859. By 1862, the city had a population of over 1,600 and a soaring economy.

In the late 19th century, during the height of iron mining, Marquette became nationally known as a summer haven. Visitors brought in by Great Lakes passenger steamships filled the city's hotels and resorts.

South of the city, K. I. Sawyer Air Force Base was an important Air Force installation during the Cold War, host to B-52H bombers and KC-135 tankers of the Strategic Air Command, as well as a fighter interceptor squadron. The base closed in September 1995, and is now the county's Sawyer International Airport.

Marquette continues to be a shipping port for hematite ores and, today, enriched iron ore pellets, from nearby mines and pelletizing plants. About 7.9 million gross tons of pelletized iron ore passed through Marquette's Presque Isle Harbor in 2005.

The Roman Catholic Bishop Frederic Baraga is buried at St. Peter's Cathedral, which is the center for the Diocese of Marquette.

1.1. Postal and philatelic history

In addition to the Marquette #1 Post Office there is the "Northern Michigan University Bookstore Contract Station #384".

The first day of issue of a postal card showing Bishop Frederic Baraga took place in Marquette on 29 June 1984, and that of the Wonders of America Lake Superior stamp on May 27, 2006.

2. Geography

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.

The city includes several small islands (principally Middle Island, Gull Island, Lover's Island, Presque Isle Pt. Rocks, White Rocks, Ripley Rock, and Picnic Rocks) in Lake Superior. The Marquette Underwater Preserve lies immediately offshore.

Marquette Mountain, used for skiing, is located in the city, as is most of the land of Marquette Branch Prison of the Michigan Department of Corrections. Trowbridge Park (an unincorporated part of Marquette Township) is located to the west, and Marquette Township to the northwest of the city.

3. Demographics

3.1. 2010 census

As of the census of 2010, there were 21,355 people, 8,321 households, and 3,788 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 8,756 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 91.1% White, 4.4% African American, 1.5% Native American, 0.9% Asian, 0.3% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.4% of the population.

There were 8,321 households of which 18.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 33.3% were married couples living together, 9.0% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 54.5% were non-families. 38.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.05 and the average family size was 2.71.

The median age in the city was 29.1 years. 12.2% of residents were under the age of 18; 30.6% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 22.3% were from 25 to 44; 21.9% were from 45 to 64; and 13% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 51.8% male and 48.2% female.

3.2. 2000 census

At the 2000 census, there were 19,661 people, 8,071 households and 4,067 families residing in the city. The population density was 1,723.9 per square mile (665.3/km²). There were 8,429 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 95% White, 0.8% African American, 1.7% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0% Pacific Islander, 0.22% from other races, and 1.33% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.77% of the population. 15.5% were of German, 12.6% Finnish, 8.9% French, 8.5% English, 8.2% Irish, 6.8% Italian and 6.7% Swedish ancestry according to Census 2000.

There were 8,071 households of which 23.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.2% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 49.6% were non-families. 37.0% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.13 and the average family size was 2.81.

Age distribution was 16.8% under the age of 18, 25.9% from 18 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 19.7% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females there were 94.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.4 males.

The median household income was $29,918, and the median family income was $48,120. Males had a median income of $34,107 versus $24,549 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,787. About 7.2% of families and 17.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.3% of those under age 18 and 5.1% of those age 65 or over.

4. Business

Along with Northern Michigan University, the largest employers in Marquette are the Marquette School System, Marquette General Hospital (a regional medical center which is the only Level 2 Trauma center in the Upper Peninsula), Marquette Branch Prison, Pioneer Surgical Technology now part of RTI Surgical, and Charter Communications.

5. In film and literature

Robert Traver (John Voelker) set his novels Anatomy of a Murder (1958) and Laughing Whitefish (1965) in Marquette. The film version of Anatomy of a Murder, dramatizing a 1952 murder that happened in the area and the subsequent trial, was partly filmed in Marquette and Big Bay. Much of it was filmed in the Marquette County Courthouse in Marquette, where the actual murder case had been tried. Traver's Danny and the Boys (1951) is a collection of short stories set in and around Marquette.

Philip Caputo set his novel Indian Country (1987) in the Upper Peninsula and several scenes depict Marquette.

Jim Harrison's novel True North (2005) tells about a Marquette family whose wealth is based on exploiting Upper Peninsula timber.

Jeffrey Eugenides' Pulitzer Prize winning novel, Middlesex (2002) refers to Marquette by name, in addition to other locations in Michigan.

A large portion of the graphic novel Blankets, by Craig Thompson, takes place in Marquette.

6. Parks, sports and recreation

The city of Marquette has a number of parks and recreational facilities which are used by city and county residents. Presque Isle Park is Marquette's most popular park located on the north side of the city. It includes of mostly forested land and juts out into Lake Superior. The park was designed by Frederick Law Olmsted, noted for designing Central Park in New York City. Amenities include a wooden band shell for concerts, a park pavilion, a gazebo, a marina, a concession stand, picnic tables, barbecue pits, walking/skiing trails, playground facilities, and Moosewood Nature Center.

The city has two popular beaches, South Beach Park and McCarty's Cove. McCarty's Cove, flanked by the red U.S. Coast Guard Station lighthouse on its south shore, serves as a reprieve from hot summer days, where city and county residents alike take advantage of the cool, but tolerable, water temperatures and the cooling effects of the lake-generated sea breeze. Both beaches have picnic areas, grills, children's playgrounds and lifeguard stands.

Other parks include Tourist Park, Founder's Landing, LaBonte Park, Mattson Lower Harbor Park, Park Cemetery, Shiras Park, Williams Park, Harlow Park, Pocket Park, Spring Street Park and Father Marquette Park.

There are also numerous other recreational facilities located within the city. Lakeview Arena is best known for its use as an ice hockey facility, but it also hosts a number of public events. A skateboard park is located just outside of the arena and open during the summer. Lakeview Arena was home to the Marquette Electricians and Marquette Senior High School's Redmen hockey team. In 1974, the arena replaced the historic Palestra, which had been located a few blocks away. Gerard Haley Memorial Baseball field home of the Marquette Blues and Reds is located in the north side along with numerous little league and softball fields.

The city is also known for fishing for deep water lake trout, whitefish, salmon and brown trout.

Marquette has the largest wooden dome in the world, the Superior Dome – unofficially but affectionately known as the YooperDome. (The second largest, located in Japan, is just one square foot smaller.) During the football season, the Dome is used primarily for football on its newly renovated astro turf field. The turf was installed in July 2009. Northern Michigan University holds its home football games in the Dome, as does the Michigan High School Athletic Association with the upper peninsula's High School football playoffs. The dome also hosts numerous private and public events which draw in thousands from around the region.

The Marquette Golf Club has brought international recognition to the area for its unique and dramatic Greywalls course, opened in 2005. The course features several panoramic views of Lake Superior and winds its way through rocky outcroppings, heaving fairways and a rolling valley, yet is located less than two miles (3 km) from the downtown area.

Marquette also has an extensive network of biking and walking paths throughout the city. The city has been gradually expanding the paths and has been promoting itself as a walkable and livable community. Cross Country ski trails are also located at Presque Isle Park and the Fit Strip.

Camping facilities are located at Tourist Park.

Live theatrical productions are provided through Northern Michigan University's Forest Roberts Theatre and Black Box Theatre, Marquette's Graverate School Kaufman Auditorium and Lake Superior Theatre, a semi-professional summer stock theatre.

The combination of hilly terrain (a vertical difference from top to bottom) and large area snow falls makes downhill skiing a reality on the edge of town.

7. Transportation

Marquette is served by American Eagle and Delta Air Lines out of Sawyer International Airport with daily flights to Chicago and Detroit.

Marquette is served by a transportation bus system called the "MarqTran" that runs through the city and to nearby places such as Sawyer International Airport and Ishpeming. Indian Trails bus lines operates daily intercity bus service between Hancock and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, with a stop in Marquette.

Marquette has limited freight rail service by the Lake Superior and Ishpeming Railroad. The Canadian National Railway also goes through nearby Negaunee.

7.1. Highways

is a major highway continuing westerly and northerly toward Houghton and southerly toward Escanaba.

travels westerly to Wakefield and easterly toward Sault Ste. Marie.

provides a direct connection to Sawyer International Airport.

8. Museums, galleries, lighthouses

The Marquette Maritime Museum, including the Marquette Harbor Light;

The Upper Peninsula Children's Museum, Baraga Avenue.

The Marquette County History Museum.

The DeVos Art Museum, Northern Michigan University.

The Oasis Gallery for Contemporary Art.

9. Climate

Marquette has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb) with four distinct seasons that is strongly moderated by Lake Superior and is located in Plant Hardiness zone 5b. Winters are long and cold with a January average of . Winter temperatures are slightly warmer than inland locations at a similar latitude due to the release of the heat stored by the lake, which moderates the climate. On average, there are 11.6 days where the temperature reaches below and most days during winter remain below freezing. However, mild spells of weather can occur time to time. Being located in the snowbelt region, Marquette receives a significant amount of snowfall during the winter months, mostly from lake-effect snow. Because Lake Superior rarely freezes over completely, this enables lake effect snow to persist throughout winter, making Marquette the third snowiest city in the contiguous United States as reported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with an average annual snowfall of . The snow depth in winter usually exceeds .

Summers are warm with the warmest months, July and August, each averaging , showing somewhat of a seasonal lag. The surrounding lake cools summertime temperatures and as a result, temperatures above are rare, with only 3.4 days per year. Spring and fall are transitional seasons that are generally mild though highly variable due to the alternation of air masses moving quickly. Spring is usually cooler than fall because the surrounding lake is slow to warm than the land while in fall, the lake releases heat, warming the area.

Marquette receives of precipitation per year, which is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, though September and October are the wettest months with January and February being the driest. The average window for nighttime freezes is October 15 thru May 7. The highest temperature ever recorded in Marquette was on July 15, 1901 and the lowest was on February 8, 1861. Marquette receives an average of 2294 hours of sunshine per year or 51% of possible sunshine, ranging from a low of 29% in December to a high of 68% in July.

10. Education

10.1. Public schools

The City of Marquette is served by the Marquette Area Public Schools. The district is the largest school district in the Upper Peninsula and Northern Wisconsin, with about 3,100 students and 420 Faculty and Staff.

Marquette Senior High School, Grades 9-12 (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Marquette Alternative High School at Vandenboom (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Bothwell Middle School, Grades 5-8 (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Cherry Creek Elementary (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Graveraet Elementary (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Sandy Knoll Elementary School (Marquette Area Public Schools)

Superior Hills Elementary School (Marquette Area Public Schools)

North Star Academy (Public Charter School)

10.2. Private schools

Father Marquette Elementary School

Father Marquette Middle School

Crossroads Christian Academy

10.3. Universities

Marquette is home to Northern Michigan University, the Upper Peninsula's largest university at just under 10,000 students.

10.4. Public libraries

Peter White Public Library

11. Media

Multiple media outlets provide local coverage of the Marquette area.

Newspaper: The Mining Journal, The North Wind, and Marquette Monthly

Television: WLUC-TV/WLUC-DT2, WBUP-TV/WBKP, WZMQ, WNMU-TV and WJMN-TV

Radio: WNMU-FM, WHWL-FM, WUPK-FM, WFXD-FM, WUPT-FM, WUPX, WJPD-FM, WUPZ-FM, WKPK-FM, WUPG-FM, WGLQ-FM, WRUP-FM, WNGE-FM, WKQS-FM, WCMM-FM, W291BH, WMQT, WDMJ-AM, WIAN-AM and WZAM-AM

12. Suburbs of Marquette

Harvey

Chocolay Township

Trowbridge Park

Marquette Township

13. Accolades and awards

2010 Distinctive Destination – National Trust of Historic Preservation (Voted #1 Fan Favorite)

2008 Top 10 Winter Family Getaways – Weather Channel

2008 #7 Best Place to Live for Hunters and Anglers – Outdoor Life Magazine

2008 #7 in Mid-West in Rural America – Progressive Farmer

2005, 2007, 2008 One of the 100 Best Communities for Young People – America's Promise: Alliance for Youth

2006 #7 Place to Build a Vacation Home – Men's Journal

2005 Top 10 Summer Vacation Destination – Sherman Travel

2004 Most Livable Community – Partners for Livable Communities

2004 Michigan Cool City – Governor Jennifer Granholm

2003 All America County – National Civic League

Tree City for 30 Years

Top micropolitan area- Site Selection Magazine

14. Festivals and events

Art on the Rocks – Art festival at Ellwood Mattson Lower Harbor Park

Hiawatha Music Festival Traditional music festival at Tourist Park (30th Annual 18–20 July 2008)

Marquette's 4 July Celebration

Superior Bike Fest

UP 200 Dog Sled Race

Noquemanon Ski Marathon

Marquette Area Blues Fest

Marquette Scandinavian Midsummer Festival and Wife-Carrying Contest

U.P. Fall Beer Festival- hosted by Michigan Brewers Guild

Ore to Shore

Marquette Marathon

OutBack Art Fair

15. Sister cities

Marquette has two sister cities.

Higashiōmi (Japan) since 1979

Kajaani (Finland) 1997

16. Notable people

Stephen Adamini, politician

Edward Breitung, minister

Leonard Brumm, college hockey coach

Alfred Burt, composer of Christmas carols

Kyle Carr, speed skater

Curtis L. Carter, academic and founder of the Patrick and Beatrice Haggerty Museum of Art

Tony Chebatoris, the only person executed in Michigan since 1846

Sallie W. Chisholm, oceanographer

Robert William Davis, politician

Shani Davis, speed skater

Susan Diol, actress

Nita Engle, artist

Robert Erickson, composer

Joe Fine, mayor of Marquette 1964–1965 and prominent businessman

James Henry Garland, Catholic bishop

John Gilmore, NFL tight end

Patricia Hogan, professor

John Henry Jacobs, former mayor

Alfred V. Kidder, archaeologist

Reynolds R. Kinkade, justice of the Ohio Supreme Court

John Kivela, former mayor

John Munro Longyear, former mayor and land developer

Mary Beecher Longyear, philanthropist

John Lautner, architect

John D. Magnum, politician

Francis Joseph Magner, Catholic bishop

Aghasi Manukyan, wrestler

Helen Maroulis, wrestler

Beverly Matherne, writer

C. V. Money, coach

Ignatius Mrak, bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Marquette

William J. Olcott, mining executive and college football player

David Palumbo, illustrator

Jimmy Peters, Sr., NHL hockey player

Hjalmar Peterson, musician and comedian

Joseph G. Pinten, Catholic bishop

Robert Roosa, economist

Chris Rothfuss, Wyoming politician

Ralph Royce, USAF general

Mark Francis Schmitt, Catholic bishop

Bernard F. Sliger, former president, Florida State University

Sycamore Smith, folk musician

Matthew Songer, surgeon

Frederic Dorr Steele, illustrator

Mary Stein, actress

Jane Summersett, ice dancer

Alfred P. Swineford, former mayor and newspaper editor

John Vertin, Catholic bishop

Peter White, businessman

Dallas Drake, NHL hockey player

Justin Florek, NHL hockey player

Wendel Suckow, luger

Mike Bordick, MLB baseball player

Vernon Forrest, boxer

17. See also

Best places in the US to retire

Big Bay Point Light

Shipwrecks of the 1913 Great Lakes storm

18. Notes

19. Further reading

20. External links