The Noble Eightfold Path (, ) is one of the principal teachings of the Buddha, who described it as the way leading to the cessation of suffering (dukkha) and the achievement of self-awakening. It is used to develop insight into the true nature of phenomena (or reality) and to eradicate greed, hatred, and delusion. The Noble Eightfold Path is the fourth of the Buddha's Four Noble Truths; the first element of the Noble Eightfold Path is, in turn, an understanding of the Four Noble Truths. It is also known as the Middle Path or Middle Way.

All eight elements of the Path begin with the word "right", which translates the word samyañc (in Sanskrit) or sammā (in Pāli). These denote completion, togetherness, and coherence, and can also suggest the senses of "perfect" or "ideal". 'Samma' is also translated as "wholesome", "wise" and "skillful".

In Buddhist symbolism, the Noble Eightfold Path is often represented by means of the dharma wheel (dharmachakra), whose eight spokes represent the eight elements of the path.

1. Origin

1.1. According to the Buddhist tradition

According to discourses found in both the Theravada school's Pali canon, and some of the Āgamas in the Chinese Buddhist canon, the Noble Eightfold Path was rediscovered by Gautama Buddha during his quest for enlightenment. The scriptures describe an ancient path which has been followed and practiced by all the previous Buddhas. The Noble Eightfold Path is a practice said to lead its practitioner toward self-awakening and liberation. The path was taught by the Buddha to his disciples so that they, too, could follow it.

Additionally, some sources give alternate definitions for the Noble Eightfold Path. The Ekottara Āgama in particular contains variant teachings of basic doctrines such as the Noble Eightfold Path, which are different from those found in the Pali Canon.

1.2. Historical

According to Vetter, the description of the Buddhist path may initially have been as simple as the term "the middle way". In time, this short description was elaborated, resulting in the description of the eightfold path. Vetter and Bucknell both note that longer descriptions of "the path" can be found, which can be condensed into the eightfold path. One of those longer sequences, from the CulaHatthipadopama-sutta, the "Lesser Discourse on the Simile of the Elephant's Footprints", is as follows:

Dhammalsaddhalpabbajja: A layman hears a Buddha teach the Dhamma, comes to have faith in him, and decides to take ordination as a monk;

sila: He adopts the moral precepts;

indriyasamvara: He practises "guarding the six sense-doors";

sati-sampajanna: He practises mindfulness and self-possession (actually described as mindfulness of the body, kdydnussati);

jhana 1: He finds an isolated spot in which to meditate, purifies his mind of the hindrances (nwarana), and attains the first rupa-jhana;

jhana 2: He attains the second jhana';

jhana 3: He attains the third jhana;

jhana 4: He attains the fourth jhana;

pubbenivasanussati-nana: he recollects his many former existences in samsara;

sattanam cutupapata-nana: he observes the death and rebirth of beings according to their karmas;

dsavakkhaya-nana: He brings about the destruction of the dsavas (cankers), and attains a profound realization of (as opposed to mere knowledge about) the four noble truths;

vimutti: He perceives that he is now liberated, that he has done what was to be done.

2. Threefold division

The Noble Eightfold Path is sometimes divided into three basic divisions, as follows:

This presentation is called the "Three Higher Trainings" in Mahāyāna Buddhism: higher moral discipline, higher concentration and higher wisdom. "Higher" here refers to the fact that these trainings that lead to liberation and enlightenment are engaged in with the motivation of renunciation or bodhicitta.

3. Practice

According to the bhikkhu (monk) and scholar Walpola Rahula, the divisions of the noble eightfold path "are to be developed more or less simultaneously, as far as possible according to the capacity of each individual. They are all linked together and each helps the cultivation of the others." Bhikkhu Bodhi explains that "with a certain degree of progress all eight factors can be present simultaneously, each supporting the others. However, until that point is reached, some sequence in the unfolding of the path is inevitable."

According to the discourses in the Pali and Chinese canons, right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right mindfulness are used as the support and requisite conditions for the practice of right concentration. Understanding of the right view is the preliminary role, and is also the forerunner of the entire Noble Eightfold Path. The practitioner should first try to understand the concepts of right view. Once right view has been understood, it will inspire and encourage the arising of right intention within the practitioner. Right intention will lead to the arising of right speech. Right speech will lead to the arising of right action. Right action will lead to the arising of right livelihood. Right livelihood will lead to the arising of right effort. Right effort will lead to the arising of right mindfulness. The practitioner must make the right effort to abandon the wrong view and to enter into the right view. Right mindfulness is used to constantly remain in the right view. This will help the practitioner restrain greed, hatred and delusion.

Once these support and requisite conditions have been established, a practitioner can then practice right concentration more easily. During the practice of right concentration, one will need to use right effort and right mindfulness to aid concentration practice. In the state of concentration, one will need to investigate and verify his or her understanding of right view. This will then result in the arising of right knowledge, which will eliminate greed, hatred and delusion. The last and final factor to arise is right liberation.

4. Wisdom

"Wisdom" (prajñā / paññā), sometimes translated as "discernment" at its preparatory role, provides the sense of direction with its conceptual understanding of reality. It is designed to awaken the faculty of penetrative understanding to see things as they really are. At a later stage, when the mind has been refined by training in moral discipline and concentration, and with the gradual arising of right knowledge, it will arrive at a superior right view and right intention.

4.1. Right view

Right view ( / ) can also be translated as "right perspective", "right outlook" or "right understanding".

According to Paul Fuller, right-view is a way of seeing which transcends all views. It is a detached way of seeing, different from the attitude of holding to any view, wrong or right.

According to contemporary Theravada Buddhism, it is the right way of looking at life, nature, and the world as they really are for us. It is to understand how our reality works. It acts as the reasoning with which someone starts practicing the path. It explains the reasons for our human existence, suffering, sickness, aging, death, the existence of greed, hatred, and delusion. Right view gives direction and efficacy to the other seven path factors. It begins with concepts and propositional knowledge, but through the practice of right concentration, it gradually becomes transmuted into wisdom, which can eradicate the fetters of the mind. An understanding of right view will inspire the person to lead a virtuous life in line with right view. In the Pāli and Chinese canons, it is explained thus:

There are two types of right view:

View with taints: this view is mundane. Having this type of view will bring merit and will support the favourable existence of the sentient being in the realm of samsara.

View without taints: this view is supramundane. It is a factor of the path and will lead the holder of this view toward self-awakening and liberation from the realm of samsara. Right view has many facets; its elementary form is suitable for lay followers, while the other form, which requires deeper understanding, is suitable for monastics. Usually, it involves understanding the following reality:

Moral law of karma: Every action (by way of body, speech, and mind) will have karmic results (a.k.a. reaction). Wholesome and unwholesome actions will produce results and effects that correspond with the nature of that action. It is the right view about the moral process of the world.

The three characteristics: everything that arises will cease (impermanence). Mental and body phenomena are impermanent, source of suffering and not-self.

Suffering: Birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, distress, and despair are suffering. Not being able to obtain what one wants is also suffering. The arising of craving is the proximate cause of the arising of suffering and the cessation of craving is the proximate cause of the cessation of the suffering. The quality of ignorance is the root cause of the arising of suffering, and the elimination of this quality is the root cause of the cessation of suffering. The way leading to the cessation of suffering is the noble eightfold path. This type of right view is explained in terms of Four Noble Truths. Right view for monastics is explained in detail in the ("Right View Discourse"), in which Ven. Sariputta instructs that right view can alternately be attained by the thorough understanding of the unwholesome and the wholesome, the four nutriments, the twelve nidanas or the three taints. "Wrong view" arising from ignorance (avijja), is the precondition for wrong intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong mindfulness and wrong concentration. The practitioner should use right effort to abandon the wrong view and to enter into right view. Right mindfulness is used to constantly remain in right view.

The purpose of right view is to clear one's path of the majority of confusion, misunderstanding, and deluded thinking. It is a means to gain right understanding of reality. Right view should be held with a flexible, open mind, without clinging to that view as a dogmatic position. In this way, right view becomes a route to liberation rather than an obstacle.

4.2. Right intention

Right intention (samyak-saṃkalpa / sammā sankappa) can also be known as "right thought", "right resolve", "right conception", "right aspiration" or "the exertion of our own will to change". In this factor, the practitioner should constantly aspire to rid themselves of whatever qualities they know to be wrong and immoral. Correct understanding of right view will help the practitioner to discern the differences between right intention and wrong intention. In the Chinese and Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

It means the renunciation of the worldly things and an accordant greater commitment to the spiritual path; good will; and a commitment to non-violence, or harmlessness, towards other living beings.

5. Ethical conduct

For the mind to be unified in concentration, it is necessary to refrain from unwholesome deeds of body and speech to prevent the faculties of bodily action and speech from becoming tools of the defilements. Ethical conduct (Śīla / Sīla) is used primarily to facilitate mental purification.

5.1. Right speech

Right speech (samyag-vāc / sammā-vācā), deals with the way in which a Buddhist practitioner would best make use of their words. In the Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

The Samaññaphala Sutta, Kevatta Sutta and Cunda Kammaraputta Sutta elaborate:

The Abhaya Sutta elaborates:

In every case, if it is not true, beneficial nor timely, one is not to say it. The Buddha followed this, for example, when asked questions of a purely metaphysical nature, unrelated to the goal, path or discipline that he taught. When asked a question such as "Is the universe eternal?", the Buddha dismissed the topic with the response: "It does not further." (or: "The personal possibilities (goals) assigned you are not furthered by an answer to an ultimate question about the universe's fate.")

5.2. Right action

Right action (samyak-karmānta / sammā-kammanta) can also be translated as "right conduct". As such, the practitioner should train oneself to be morally upright in one's activities, not acting in ways that would be corrupt or bring harm to oneself or to others. In the Chinese and Pali Canon, it is explained as:

For the lay follower, the Cunda Kammaraputta Sutta elaborates:

For the monastic, the Samaññaphala Sutta adds:

5.3. Right livelihood

Right livelihood (samyag-ājīva / sammā-ājīva). This means that practitioners ought not to engage in trades or occupations which, either directly or indirectly, result in harm for other living beings. In the Chinese and Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

More concretely today interpretations include "work and career need to be integrated into life as a Buddhist," it is also an ethical livelihood, "wealth obtained through rightful means" (Bhikku Basnagoda Rahula) - that means being honest and ethical in business dealings, not to cheat, lie or steal. As people are spending most of their time at work, it’s important to assess how our work affects our mind and heart. So important questions include "How can work become meaningful? How can it be a support, not a hindrance, to spiritual practice — a place to deepen our awareness and kindness?"

The five types of businesses that should not be undertaken:

Business in weapons: trading in all kinds of weapons and instruments for killing.

Business in human beings: slave trading, prostitution, or the buying and selling of children or adults.

Business in meat: "meat" refers to the bodies of beings after they are killed. This includes breeding animals for slaughter.

Business in intoxicants: manufacturing or selling intoxicating drinks or addictive drugs.

Business in poison: producing or trading in any kind of poison or a toxic product designed to kill.

6. Concentration

Concentration ("samadhi") is achieved through concentrating the attention on a single meditation object. This brings the calm and collectedness needed to develop true wisdom by direct experience.

6.1. Right effort

Right effort (samyag-vyāyāma / sammā-vāyāma) can also be translated as "right endeavor" or "right diligence". In this factor, the practitioners should make a persisting effort to abandon all the wrong and harmful thoughts, words, and deeds. The practitioner should instead be persisting in giving rise to what would be good and useful to themselves and others in their thoughts, words, and deeds, without a thought for the difficulty or weariness involved. In both the Chinese and the Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

Although the above instruction is given to the male monastic order, it is also meant for the female monastic order and can be practiced by lay followers of both genders.

The above four phases of right effort mean to:

Prevent the unwholesome that has not yet arisen in oneself.

Let go of the unwholesome that has arisen in oneself.

Bring up the wholesome that has not yet arisen in oneself.

Maintain the wholesome that has arisen in oneself.

6.2. Right mindfulness

Right mindfulness ( / sammā-sati), also translated as "right memory", "right awareness" or "right attention". Here, practitioners should constantly keep their minds alert to phenomena that affect the body and mind. They should be mindful and deliberate, making sure not to act or speak due to inattention or forgetfulness. In the Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

Although the above instruction is given to the male monastic order, it is also meant for the female monastic order and can be practiced by lay followers from both genders.

Bhikkhu Bodhi, a monk of the Theravada tradition, further explains the concept of mindfulness as follows:

The Maha Satipatthana Sutta also teaches that by mindfully observing these phenomena, we begin to discern its arising and subsiding and the Three Characteristics of Dharma in direct experience, which leads to the arising of insight and the qualities of dispassion, non-clinging, and release.

6.3. Right concentration

Right concentration (samyak-samādhi / sammā-samādhi), as its Sanskrit and Pali names indicate, is the practice of concentration (samadhi). It is also known as right meditation. As such, the practitioner concentrates on an object of attention until reaching full concentration and a state of meditative absorption (jhana). Traditionally, the practice of samadhi can be developed through mindfulness of breathing (anapanasati), through visual objects (kasina), and through repetition of phrases (mantra). Jhana is used to suppress the five hindrances in order to enter into Samadhi. Jhana is an instrument used for developing wisdom by cultivating insight and using it to examine true nature of phenomena with direct cognition. This leads to cutting off the defilements, realizing the dhamma and, finally, self-awakening. During the practice of right concentration, the practitioner will need to investigate and verify their right view. In the process right knowledge will arise, followed by right liberation. In the Pali Canon, it is explained thus:

Although this instruction is given to the male monastic order, it is also meant for the female monastic order and can be practiced by lay followers from both genders.

According to the Pali and Chinese canon, right concentration is dependent on the development of preceding path factors:

7. Acquired factors

In the Mahācattārīsaka Sutta which appears in the Chinese and Pali canons, the Buddha explains that cultivation of the noble eightfold path leads to the development of two further factors, which are right knowledge, or insight (sammā-ñāṇa), and right liberation, or release (sammā-vimutti). These two factors fall under the category of wisdom (paññā).

7.1. Right knowledge and right liberation

Right knowledge is seeing things as they really are by direct experience, not as they appear to be, nor as the practitioner wants them to be, but as they truly are. A result of Right Knowledge is the tenth factor - Right liberation.

These two factors are the end result of correctly practicing the noble eightfold path, which arise during the practice of right concentration. The first to arise is right knowledge: this is where deep insight into the ultimate reality arises. The last to arise is right liberation: this is where self-awakening occurs and the practitioner has reached the pinnacle of their practice.

8. Cognitive psychology

In the essay "Buddhism Meets Western Science", Gay Watson explains:

The noble eightfold path is, from this psychological viewpoint, an attempt to change patterns of thought and behavior. It is for this reason that the first element of the path is right understanding (), which is how one's mind views the world. Under the wisdom (paññā) subdivision of the noble eightfold path, this worldview is intimately connected with the second element, right thought (), which concerns the patterns of thought and intention that controls one's actions. These elements can be seen at work, for example, in the opening verses of the Dhammapada: The noble eightfold path is also the fourth noble truth.

Thus, by altering one's distorted worldview, bringing out "tranquil perception" in the place of "perception polluted", one is able to ease suffering. Watson points this out from a psychological standpoint:

Research has shown that repeated action, learning, and memory can actually change the nervous system physically, altering both synaptic strength and connections. Such changes may be brought about by cultivated change in emotion and action; they will, in turn, change subsequent experience.

9. See also

Buddhist Paths to liberation

Bodhipakkhiyādhammā (thirty-seven qualities for awakening)

Five Precepts

Four Noble Truths

Four Right Exertions

Four stages of enlightenment

Seven Factors of Enlightenment

Threefold Training

Three Vajras (body, speech and mind)

Raja Yoga (Ashtanga yoga)

10. References

11. Sources

;Primary sources

Allan, John (2008). The Eightfold Path. Retrieved 2008-03-06 from "BuddhaNet" at //www.buddhanet.net/e-learning/8foldpath.htm.

Bhikkhu Bodhi. . Retrieved 4 July 2006.

Bogoda, Robert (1994). A Simple Guide to Life (Wheel No. 397/398). Kandy: BPS. Retrieved 2008-02-04 from "Access to Insight" (1996) at //www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/bogoda/wheel397.html.

Carter, John Ross and Palihawadana, Mahinda; tr. Buddhism: The Dhammapada. New York: History Book Club, 1992.

Harderwijk, Rudy. . Retrieved 4 July 2006.

Ñanamoli Thera (tr.) & Bhikkhu Bodhi (ed., rev.) (1991). The Discourse on Right View: The Sammaditthi Sutta and its Commentary (The Wheel Publication No. 377/379; includes translations of MN 9 and the associated commentary from the Papañcasudani). Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society. Retrieved 22 September 2007 from "Access to Insight" (1994) at //www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/nanamoli/wheel377.html.

Nyanasobhano, Bhikkhu (1989). Two Dialogues on Dhamma (Wheel No. 363/364). Kandy: BPS. Retrieved 2008-02-04 from "Access to Insight" (2005) at //www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/price/wheel363.html.

Rahula, Walpola. What the Buddha Taught. New York: Grove Press, 1974. ISBN 0-8021-3031-3.

Rewata Dhamma. The First Discourse of the Buddha. Somerville, Massachusetts: Wisdom Publications, 1997. ISBN 0-86171-104-1.

Snelling, John. The Buddhist Handbook: A Complete Guide to Buddhist Schools, Teaching, Practice, and History. Rochester: Inner Traditions, 1991. ISBN.

Sri Lanka Buddha Jayanti Tipitaka Series (SLTP) (n.d.). Avijjāvaggo (SN 44 [Sinhalese ed.], ch. 1, in Pali). Retrieved on 16 July 2007 from "Mettanet - Lanka" at: //metta.lk/tipitaka/2Sutta-Pitaka/3Samyutta-Nikaya/Samyutta5/44-Magga-Samyutta/01-Avijjavaggo-p.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu; tr. Magga-vibhanga Sutta: An Analysis of the Path (SN 45.8), 1996. Retrieved 25 June 2006 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn45/sn45.008.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Abhaya Sutta: To Prince Abhaya (On Right Speech) (MN 58); 1997a. Retrieved 20 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.058.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Avijja Sutta: Ignorance (SN 45.1); 1997f. Retrieved 2008-02-04 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/sn/sn45/sn45.001.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Cunda Kammaraputta Sutta: To Cunda the Silversmith (AN 10.176); 1997b. Retrieved 19 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an10/an10.176.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Kevatta (Kevaddha) Sutta: To Kevatta (DN 11); 1997c. Retrieved 19 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/dn/dn.11.0.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Maha-cattarisaka Sutta: The Great Forty (MN 117); 1997d. Retrieved 2 October 2006 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.117.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. : The Fruits of the Contemplative Life (DN 2); 1997e. Retrieved 19 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/dn/dn.02.0.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Canki Sutta: With Canki (excerpt) (MN 95); 1999. Retrieved 20 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.095x.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Maha-satipatthana Sutta: The Great Frames of Reference (DN 22); 2000. Retrieved 18 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/dn/dn.22.0.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Vanijja Sutta: Business (Wrong Livelihood) (AN 5.177); 2001. Retrieved 2 October 2006 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an05/an05.177.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Micchatta Sutta: Wrongness (AN 10.103); 2004. Retrieved 2008-02-04 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an10/an10.103.than.html.

Thanissaro Bhikkhu. Saccavibhanga Sutta: An Analysis of the Truths (MN 141); 2005. Retrieved 18 July 2007 from "Access to Insight" at //www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/mn/mn.141.than.html.

Watson, Gay. . Retrieved 12 June 2012. ;Secondary sources

Alexander Berzin, October 2007at //www.berzinarchives.com/web/en/archives/sutra/level4_deepening_understanding_path/path/eight_branches_arya_pathway_mind_ei.html "The Eight Branches of an Arya Pathway Mind, (The Eightfold Noble Path)"

Bucknell, Roderick & Stuart-Fox, Martin (1986). The Twilight Language: Explorations in Buddhist Meditation and Symbolism. Curzon Press: London. ISBN 0-312-82540-4

Kohn, Michael H.; tr. The Shambhala Dictionary of Buddhism and Zen. Boston: Shambhala, 1991.

Niimi, J. . Retrieved 8 July 2006.

12. Further reading

Sangharakshita, The Buddha's Noble Eightfold Path, Windhorse Publications, 2007. ISBN 1-899579-81-8.

13. External links

by Bhikkhu Bodhi

by Sayadaw Gyi Vimalaramsi

by Thanissaro Bhikkhu

by Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo

by Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo

by the Buddha. In this sutta, the Buddha instructs his son about skillful mental, verbal and bodily actions. Thanissaro Bhikkhu (trans.) (2006)