Otolaryngology , is the study of ear, nose, and throat conditions or ENT. It is also referred to as Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery or otorhinolaryngology.

Physicians specializing in otolaryngology are called otolaryngologists or by the nickname "ENTs" or "ENT doctors" and often treat children with persistent ear, nose, and throat conditions to include surgery. Adult patients often seek treatment from an otolaryngologist for sinus infections, age-related hearing loss, and cancers of these regions.

1. Etymology

The term is a combination of four Ancient Greek words: οὖς ous (gen.: ὠτός otos), "ear", ῥίς rhis, "nose", λάρυγξ larynx, "larynx" and -λογία -logia, "study".

2. Training

Otolaryngologists are physicians (MD, DO, MBBS, MBChB, etc.) who, in the United States, complete at least five years of surgical residency training. This is composed of one year in general surgical training and four years in otolaryngology–head and neck surgery. (In the past it varied between two and three years of each.) In Canada, practitioners complete a five-year residency training after medical school.

Following residency training, some otolaryngologists complete an advanced sub-specialty Fellowship where training can be 1–2 years in duration. In the United States and Canada, otolaryngology is one of the most competitive specialties in medicine in which to obtain a residency position following medical school.

3. Sub-specialties

(* Currently recognized by American Board of Medical Subspecialties)

4. Topics

4.1. Head and neck oncology

Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, pharynx and larynx

Oral cancer

Skin Cancer of the head & neck

Thyroid cancer

Endocrine surgery of the head and neck (thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy)

Microvascular free flap reconstruction

Skull base surgery

Salivary gland cancer

4.2. Otology and neurotology

Dizziness

BPPV – benign paroxysmal positional vertigo

Labyrinthitis/Vestibular neuronitis

Ménière's disease/Endolymphatic hydrops

Perilymphatic fistula

Acoustic neuroma

Hearing loss

Mastoiditis

Otitis externa – outer ear or ear canal inflammation

Otitis media – middle ear inflammation

Perforated eardrum (hole in the eardrum due to infection, trauma, explosion or loud noise)

Ear surgery

4.3. Rhinology

Rhinology pertains to sinus diseases and the anterior skull base.

Sinusitis – acute, chronic

Environmental allergies

Rhinitis

Pituitary tumor

Empty nose syndrome

Severe or recurrent epistaxis

4.4. Pediatric otolaryngology

Adenoidectomy

Caustic ingestion

Cricotracheal resection

Decannulation

Laryngomalacia

Laryngotracheal reconstruction

Myringotomy and tubes

Obstructive sleep apnea – pediatric

Tonsillectomy

4.5. Laryngology

Dysphonia/hoarseness

Laryngitis

Reinke's edema

Vocal cord nodules and polyps

Spasmodic dysphonia

Tracheostomy

Cancer of the larynx

Vocology – science and practice of voice habilitation

4.6. Facial plastic and reconstructive surgery

Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery is a one-year fellowship open to otolaryngologists and plastic surgeons who wish to specialize in the aesthetic and reconstructive surgery of the head, face, and neck.

Rhinoplasty and septoplasty

Facelift (rhytidectomy)

Browlift

Blepharoplasty

Otoplasty

Genioplasty

Injectable cosmetic treatments

Trauma to the face

Nasal bone fracture

Mandible fracture

Orbital fracture

Frontal sinus fracture

Complex lacerations and soft tissue damage

Skin cancer (e.g. Basal Cell Carcinoma)

5. See also

American Board of Otolaryngology

American Osteopathic Board of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology

Head mirror

Surgeon

Audiology

Oral and maxillofacial surgery

Speech-language pathology

6. References

7. External links

;Associations and Societies

;Journals