Transportation in Pakistan () is extensive and varied but still in its developing stages and serving a population of over 170 million people. Construction of new airports, roads, and railway lines have led to an employment boost in the country. Much of Pakistan's road network (National Highways) and railway network were built before 1947, mainly during the British Raj. In recent years, new national highways have been built, with the addition of motorways which has accelerated trade and logistics within the country. Airports and seaports have been built within the last 30 years with the addition of foreign and domestic funding.

1. Local transport

In urban areas there are several means of transport available, catering to a wide range of budgets.

1.1. Rapid Transits

Monorail The Government of Pakistan has planned to build a monorail system in its federal capital Islamabad.

Bus Rapid Transit

Lahore TransLahore:Lahore Transport Company was established in 1984 to ease the traffic conditions of Lahore and improve bus services. LTC got all the transport responsibilities of traveling in Lahore in December 2009. A BRTS fleet of 650 Buses was introduced. It was named TransLahore. However, the BRTS did not have dedicated lanes and had to share roads with regular traffic with no right of way privileges. This resulted in a system that was a BRTS only in name.

Lahore: Metrobus (Lahore) Bus Service was inaugurated On Feb 10, 2013. It consist of 27-kilometres long road track for the Metro Bus Service, from Gajumata to Shahadra, out of this track 8.5 km is elevated .Travel time for the 27 km is 55 Minutes. It has 27 bus stations and e-ticketing and Intelligent Transportation System are part of the MBS.

Karachi: Karachi BRT System is a Six Corridor Mass Transit Project whose studies started in 2008. The corridors include: 1. Surjani Town to Jama Cloth Market (21.1 km) 2. Model Colony to Regal Chowk (24.4 km) 3. Landhi to Luck Star Hotel (20.4 km) 4. Baldia to Shershah via Hub River Road (9.7 km) 5. Hwaksbay to Gulbai via Mauripur (11.8 km) 6. Orangi to Board Office (3.9 km). The plan to construct corridor 3 is in progress will be initiated this year (2013). Two Rail based Mass Transit Corridors are also present in the study. All these studies are prepared by JICA. These include: 1. 22.4 km (14. 1 km elevated) route from New Sabzi Mandi to Tower via M A Jinnah Road 2. 18.5 km Elevated route from Nagan Chowrangi to Korangi via Rashid Minhas Road. The Project of Karachi Circular Railway was to be started in 2013. Karachi Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA) has prepared a mass transit network for Karachi with 2030 vision suggesting 2 metro system lines and 6 RBT lines, besides Karachi Circular Railway KCR revitalization programme. The first Green Line Corridor, will be laid from Surjani to Jamia Cloth Market(21 km). The second Red Line Corridor will cover from Model Colony to Regal Chowk via Safoora Chowrangi (24.4 km). The third Corridor will cover from Dawood Chowrangi to Numaish Chowrangi and Lucky Star via 8000 road Korangi and FTC (22 km).JICA has also prepared feasibility study of two RBTS lines (Green line-Surjani to Jama Cloth market and red line-model colony to Regal Chowk via Safoora Goth, university road) and pre-facility of blue line from Sohrab Goth to tower. Karachi being Economic Engine of growth and over 18 million populated is facing tremendous growth in traffic at 7.2 percent annually, beside its disproportionate yearly growth of buses and other transport sources of 17 percent causing congestion and accidents and increasing in travelling time.This project consists of six Corridors in collaboration with JICA. The Basic Design Theme comes from the Bogota, Columbia, Transmilenio Model. The work would have started in 2009, but due to budget constraits unavailability of feasibility report the work halted. Karachi: The fresh development was made to start BRTS "yellow line" as a Pilot Project in the city. According to KMC, BRTS will be a 22-km route from Dawood Chowrangi to Numaish Chowrangi and Lucky Star via 8000 road Korangi and FTC under public Private Partnership mode where daily rider-ship is about 0.7 million per day. The proposed RBTS would cater 13,000 passengers per hour per direction.

Peshawar Metro is a mass rapid transit system for the city of Peshawar. The project is under the consideration of PTI led Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. PMTS will be a light rapid transit Skytrain system.Which will be initially constructed on one red line having length of 18.4 kilometer from Chamkani to Hayatabad area of Peshawar.

Rawalpindi and Islamabad: The work on Rawalpindi-Islamabad Metrobus Service was inaugurated in February 2014 and the work is scheduled to complete in 2015. It will be similar to Lahore Metrobus Service.

Faisalabad: Faisalabad Metro is a planned, single line BRT System, similar to Lahore Bus Rapid Transit System. Metro line will connect Faisalabad International Airport to City Bus Terminal, passing through main hubs of the city. Construction is expected to start at the end of 2013.

Multan: Work on Multan Metro will start in August 2014. A new firm of young Urban Engineers, Think Transportation established in 2013 mainly focuses on traffic engineering solutions is working on a mission to restructure the current transportation system and present innovative mass transit model specially for urban cities of Pakistan: Karachi Lahore

1.2. Buses

Domestic Within cities, buses provide a significant role in commuting a large number of travellers from one city to another. Recently, large CNG busses have been put onto the streets of various cities, primarily Karachi, Lahore and recently Islamabad as minivans which were originally used were beginning to cause large traffic problems. Minivans are private yellow and white minivans that have services throughout cities in Pakistan and are able to get commuters from one point of the city to the other at low-cost. Since 2000 however, the government has taken a comprehensive initiative to modernize the existing bus fleets and minimally impact the environment. This public-private enterprise would gradually introduce 8,000 CNG buses throughout the country and 800 buses in Karachi. This venture will ensure high standards of efficiency and cleanliness.

Inter City Bus service in urban areas and between cities is well established with services run by both public and private sectors. Bus services like Waraich Buses, Daewoo Express, Rehber Travel, Bilal Deawoo, Faisal Movers, Kohistan, Khan Brothers, Skyways and Niazi Express have set up modern intercity service which connects to most cities in Pakistan and runs 24 hours a day. Intercity buses tend to be more modern and well kept.

International International bus services are also well established in Pakistan and connect to various countries:

Quetta-Zahidan, Iran

Quetta-Mashad, Iran

Gwadar-Zahidan, Iran

Karachi-Quetta-Zahidan-Tehran, Iran (proposed)

Peshawar-Jalalabad, Afghanistan

Peshawar-Kabul, Afghanistan

Islamabad-Dushanbe, Tajikistan (proposed)

Islamabad-Kashghar, China (proposed)

Gilgit-Kashgar see Karakoram Highway

Lahore-Delhi, India

Muzaffarabad-Srinagar, India

1.3. Auto rickshaws

Auto rickshaws are a popular method of travelling in cities and are found in almost every city and town in Pakistan. The fare is usually negotiable before commencing a journey, however due to the level of pollution contributed by the auto-rickshaws, the government has recently begun banning older auto richshaws and replacing them with CNG auto rickshaws, which tend to be less noisy, form less pollutants and are much bigger and more comfortable than the older sets of richshaws. The Punjab Government decided in 2005 to replace two-stroke three-wheelers with CNG-fitted four-stroke rickshaws in Lahore, Multan, Faisalabad, Rawalpindi and Gujranwala. Three manufacturers were ordered to produce 60,000 four-stroke vehicles, but they reportedly supplied 2,000 to the government which were now plying on city roads. Similar ordinances are now being considered in other provinces of Pakistan. A new form of transport in Pakistan is the Qing-Qi (pronounced "ching-chee"), which is a cross between a motorcycle and auto-rickshaw. It runs just like a motorcycle but comes with three wheels instead of two and carries a much heavier load on its back. It is an urban transport vehicle and is used mostly for short distances.

1.4. Taxis

Another very common sight seen mainly at hotels and airports are yellow taxis. The drivers charge according to a meter located on the dashboard of the car, but fares can be negotiated if there is no meter. The cab drivers are reliable and will take passengers to any destination required. There are also numerous privately run services that use cars and minibuses of various types throughout Pakistan, providing a reliable and quick means of transport. Recently, the Radio Cab was introduced in Pakistan, which offers riders to call a toll free number to get in touch with the closest taxi stand. This service is currently offered in Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Karachi, Peshawar and Lahore. Services for Hyderabad and Faisalabad are now being made.

1.5. Cars

Over the years, the number of cars on Pakistani roads has tripled. Traffic jams are a common scene in major cities across Pakistan. The most popular cars on Pakistani roads are, Suzuki Mehran, Suzuki Cultus, Suzuki Alto, Suzuki Bolan, Daihatsu Coure, Hyundai Santro, Honda Civic, Honda City, Honda Accord, Toyota Corolla and Toyota Vitz. In late 2005, Suzuki introduced the APV (All-Purpose Vehicle) the first luxury family van in Pakistan. Utility vehicles (SUVs or 4x4s) are also a familiar sight in Pakistan. This type of car is very multi functional as it allows long distance and off road travel, within cities as well as city to city travel. Luxury SUVs are owned by the elite in urban cities and by all large landowners in the villages and rural areas, thus making them a fairly common sight in Pakistan. The most popular models are the Toyota Land Cruiser, Toyota Prado, Land Rover Range Rover, several Mercedes, BMW and Audis. Adam Revo, Pakistan's first manufactured car, was developed to meet the needs of low income families.

1.6. Future cars

To meet future needs, students and teachers from National University of Science and Technology developed Pakistan's first ever Hybrid Gasoline car Devrim II, an inspiration from Turkish model Devrim. Before that, students from Navel College Karachi and Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute also made their successful hybrid car. But Devrim II is the most effective one. In an interview the current team leader of Pak-Wheelers Faizan Zafar is reported to have said.

1.7. Auto rickshaws

Motorcycle rickshaws also called QINGQI Rickshaws are also common transit in many cities including Karachi, Lahore, Multan, Faisalabad, Gujranwala, Sargodha And Sialkot.

1.8. Traditional

In the small towns and farms, many people decide to walk great distances to either get to work or to walk to their nearest grocery store to get their daily shopping. The donkey cart, locally known as the Rehrri, is still visible every where in Pakistan, as poor people use this form of transport to shift cargo from one part of the city to the next. The cargo they hold ranges from fruits and vegetables, to textiles or machinery that factories require in industrial cities. The Horse & carriage, locally known as Taanga are mainly seen used for casual travelling around the city. There is one driver, with either one or two horses at the front. This method is now usually used by tourists in the spring and summer that love to see the cities in an open environment. Camel carts are also seen from time to time. Mostly seen in the hotter parts of Pakistan including Sindh, Punjab and Balochistan where farmers transport larger cargo that donkey carts can not handle. Bicycles are used by either the poorer segment of the society or for leisure. This method is still very widely used as its very economical and simple.

2. Rail

2.1. Domestic

Rail services in Pakistan are provided by the state-run Pakistan Railways, under the supervision of the Ministry of Railways. Pakistan Railways provides an important mode of transportation in Pakistan, catering to the large-scale movement of people and freight. The railway network comprises 8,163 km of which forms 7,718 km, including 293 km of electrified track. tracks form the remaining 445 km. Passenger earnings comprise 50% of the total revenue. During 1999–2000 this amounted to Rs. 4.8 billion. Pakistan Railways carry 65 million passengers annually and daily operate 228 mail, express and passenger trains. Pakistan Railways also operate special trains for various occasions. The Freight Business Unit with 12000 personnel operates over 200 freight stations on the railway network. The FBU serves the Port of Karachi and Port Qasim as well as in various other stations along the network and generates revenue from the movement of agricultural, industrial and imported products such as wheat, coal, fertilizer, cement, and sugar. About 39% of the revenue is generated from the transportation of petroleum, 19% from imported wheat, fertilizer and rock phosphate. The remaining 42% is earned from domestic traffic. The freight rates structure is based on market trends in road transport which is the main competitor to rail transport.

2.2. High Speed Rail

Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif said that a high-speed rail network will be built which will connect Peshawar to Karachi via all major cities of Pakistan during his visit to China in June 2013.. Government is making plans for this project.

2.3. Mass transit

The Karachi Circular Railway, which opened in the early 1940s, is the only functioning Mass Transit System in Pakistan as of date. In 1976, Karachi was slated to begin work on an underground metro system, but plans have been put on hold since. The Lahore Metro Bus System is another rapid mass transit system which was tested by CM of Punjab Shahbaz Sharif on December 25, 2012. It began operation on February 11, 2013. Lahore Metro would be the first mass transit system of it type in Pakistan. Peshawar Metro is also planned. On 22 May 2014, Pakistan and China signed a $1.6 billion agreement for a metro train project in Lahore. The Government decided to build the Orange Line of Lahore Metro. The work on the project will start in 2014 and will be completed within 27 months.The total length of the project will be 27.1 km and its 25.4 km track will be elevated. 1.7 km track will be underground.

In Lahore, Lahore Central Railway Station is the main railway station. Shahdara Bagh, Badami Bagh, Mughalpura, Shahdara Town, Lahore Cantonment, Wagah, Walton Cantonment, Kot Lakhpat, Kahna Nau, Jia Bagga and Raiwind are other busy railway stations located in Lahore. These urban railway stations of the city are served by commuter trains of Lahore. A large number of commuters use these station to get access to the city of Lahore.

2.4. International routes

Iran - A railway line runs from Zahedan to Quetta, and a line is finished from Zahedan to Kerman in central Iran, linking with the rest of the Iranian rail network. On May 18, 2007, a MOU for rail cooperation was signed by Pakistan and Iran under which the line will be completed by December 2008. Now that the rail systems are linked up at Zahedan, there is a break-of-gauge between the Islamic Republic of Iran Railways tracks and Pakistan Railway's Indian gauge tracks.

Afghanistan - Currently there is no rail link to Afghanistan since no railway network is present in that country, however Pakistan Rail has proposed to help build an Afghan Rail Network in three phases. The first phase will stretch from the Chaman to Spin Boldak in Afghanistan. The second phase will extend line to Kandahar and the third phase will eventually connect to Herat. From there, the line will be extended to Khushka, Turkmenistan. The final phase would link with Central Asian . It is not clear where the break-of-gauge station will be. The proposed line will also be connected the port town of Gwadar via Dalbadin and Taftan, thus connecting the port town to Central Asia.

China - There is no link with China however, on 28 February 2007 contracts were awarded for feasibility studies on a proposed line from Havelian via the Khunjerab Pass at 4730 m above sea level, to the Chinese railhead at Kashgar, a distance of about 750 km.

Turkey - An Istanbul-Tehran-Islamabad passenger rail service was proposed recently. Meanwhile a container train service was launched by the former Prime Minister of Pakistan Yousuf Raza Gilani between Islamabad and Istanbul on 14 August 2009. The first train carried 20 containers with a capacity of around and will travel from Islamabad, through Tehran, Iran and on to Istanbul in two weeks' time. According to the Minister for Railways Ghulam Ahmad Bilour, after the trial of the container train service, a passenger train will be launched. There are also hopes the route will eventually provide a link to Europe and Central Asia, and carry passengers.

India - Thar Express to Karachi and the more famous Samjhauta Express international train from Lahore, Pakistan to Amritsar (Attari) and Delhi, India. The weekly Thar Express also runs between Karachi and Bhagat Ki Kothi (near Jodhpur, Rajasthan).

Turkmenistan - Via Afghanistan (proposed) - avoiding (or narrow gauge) intervening.

2.5. Miscellaneous

In Ghangha Pur, a historic, narrow gauge horse-drawn tramway exists. It first opened in 1898, closed in 1998, and re-opened in 2010.

3. Road

3.1. National highways

During the 1990s, Pakistan began an ongoing project to rebuild all national highways throughout the country specifically to important financial, cargo and textile centers. The National Highway Authority or NHA is responsible for the maintenance of all national highways in Pakistan.

The Makran Coastal Highway follows the coast of Sindh and Balochistan provinces, linking Karachi and Gwadar. Journey time has been reduced to six or seven hours with the construction of the new Coastal Highway. The highway was built as part of an overall plan to improve transport facilities in southern Balochistan.

The Karakoram Highway is the highest paved international road in the world. It connects China and Pakistan across the Karakoram mountain range, through the Khunjerab Pass.

The Grand Trunk Road (commonly abbreviated to GT Road) is one of South Asia's oldest and longest major roads. For several centuries, it has linked the eastern and western regions of the South Asia, running from Bengal, across north India, into Peshawar in Pakistan.

The Silk Road is an extensive interconnected network of trade routes across the Asian continent connecting East, South, and Western Asia with the Mediterranean world, including North Africa and Europe. It passes through the midsection of Pakistan through cities: Peshawar, Taxila and Multan.

3.2. Motorways

The construction of motorways began in the early 1990s with the idea building a world class road network and to reduce the load off the heavily used national highways throughout the country. The M2 was the first motorway completed in 1998, linking the cities of Islamabad and Lahore. In the past 5 years, many new motorways have opened up including the M1, M3 whereas M4 is near to complete which connects city of Faislabad to Multan covering major cities in between Gojra , Toba Tek Singh, Jhang, Shorkot, Pir Mahal and Khanewal.

Total: 257,683 km

Paved: 152,033 km (including 339 km of expressways)

Unpaved: 105,650 km (2001)

Vehicles on road: 4.2 million vehicles 250,000 commercial vehicles (2004 estimate)

3.3. Provincial Highways

Provincial Highways of Azad Kashmir

Provincial Highways of Balochistan

Provincial Highways of Gilgit-Baltistan

Provincial Highways of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

Provincial Highways of Punjab

Provincial Highways of Sindh

4. Air transport

Pakistan has 148 airports. The major airports are:

Jinnah International Airport (Karachi)

Allama Iqbal International Airport (Lahore)

Benazir Bhutto International Airport (Islamabad/Rawalpindi)

Peshawar International Airport (Peshawar)

Quetta International Airport (Quetta)

Faisalabad International Airport (Faisalabad)

Multan International Airport (Multan)

Sialkot International Airport (Sialkot)

Gwadar International Airport (Gwadar)

Shaikh Zayed International Airport (Rahim Yar Khan) New Islamabad International Airport is also under construction in Islamabad.

There are also several smaller airports which have flights to and from the Gulf because of the large Pakistani diaspora working in the region. There are 91 airports with paved runways of which 14 have runways longer than 3,047 meters. The remaining 48 airports have unpaved runways including one airport with a runway longer than 3,047 meters. Pakistan also has eighteen heliports.

5. Waterways

The waterway network in Pakistan is in its infancy with Karachi being the only major city situated next to the Arabian Sea. Still plans are being proposed for the development of the waterways in the country along the Indus River and through the Punjab as it would boost employment opportunities and the economic and social development of Pakistan. See a list of dry ports and sea ports in Pakistan.

Port of Gwadar - Gwadar, Balochistan

Port of Karachi - Karachi (City Centre), Sindh

Port Qasim - East Karachi, Sindh

Port of Pasni - Pasni, Balochistan

6. Pipelines

Length of pipelines for crude oil is .

Length of Petroleum products pipeline is .

Length of Natural gas pipelines is . The above information was calculated in 2009.

7. Bridges

8. China-Pakistan Economic Corridor

China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is an under-construction development program to connect Gwadar Port in southern Pakistan to China’s northwestern autonomous region of Xinjiang via highways, railway's and pipelines to transport oil and gas. Chinese Premier Li Keqiang was among the first advocates of the project, since then Chinese President Xi Jinping, formar Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari and Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif have become strong supporters of the project. When the corridor is constructed it will serve as a primary gateway for trade between China and Middle East and Africa, in particular oil from the Middle East could be offloaded at Gwadar, which is located just outside the mouth of the Persian Gulf, and transported to China through the Baluchistan province in Pakistan. Such a link would vastly cut the 12,000-kilometre route that Mideast oil supplies must now take to reach Chinese ports.

The project received a major boost when control of Gwadar was transferred to China’s state-owned China Overseas Ports Holding in February 2013. Built by Chinese workers and opened in 2007, Gwadar is undergoing a major expansion to turn it into a full-fledged, deep-water commercial port. On 19 February 2014, South China Morning Post reported that Pakistan and China have signed agreements for constructing an international airport at Gwadar, for upgrading a section of the 1,300-kilometre Karakorum Highway connecting to Islamabad and of a fibre-optic cable to be laid from the Chinese border to the Pakistani city of Rawalpindi. According the The Diplomat with the development of the corridor, Central Asia, traditionally an economically closed region owing to its geography and lack of infrastructure, will have greater access to the sea and to the global trade network. Pak-China Economic Corridor Secretariat was inaugurated in Islamabad on August 27, 2013.

9. Gallery

File:Tricycle_%26_taxi%27s.jpg File:Manora - Tallest Lighthouse of Pakistan P11008351.jpg File:Iqbal park tourist buses.jpg File:Billboards in lahore indigo.jpeg File:Lahore Railway Station35.jpg File:Shaheen_Air_International_Boeing_737-200_(edit).jpg File:Malakwal.jpg File:02 dhow in Karachi Nov 76.jpg File:Frieghtliner at the karachi dock.JPG File:Karachi Cantt view from the top.jpg File:Korangi Road Karachi.jpg File:Quetta Railway Station - 40311.jpg File:National highway Karachi Coach.jpg File:Sign indicating to keep Karachi clean.jpg File:Kirani-2008.jpg File:Hawks bay karachi.JPG

File:Transportation in Pakistan.jpg

10. See also

Airlines of Pakistan

Buses in Pakistan

Auto rickshaw

Customised buses and trucks in Pakistan

Pakistan Civil Aviation Authority

Karakoram Highway

Khyber Pass

Lahore Railway Station

Makran Coastal Highway

Mobile World Magazine

Motorways of Pakistan

National Highways of Pakistan

Port of Karachi

Pakistan International Airlines

List of bus routes in Lahore

11. References

12. External links