Postmodern music is either simply music of the postmodern era, or music that follows aesthetical and philosophical trends of postmodernism. As the name suggests, the postmodernist movement formed partly in reaction to modernism. Even so, postmodern music still does not primarily define itself in opposition to modernist music; this label is applied instead by critics and theorists.

Postmodern music is not a distinct musical style, but rather refers to music of the postmodern era. The terms "postmodern", "postmodernism", "postmodernist", and "postmodernity" are exasperating terms . Indeed, postmodernists question the tight definitions and categories of academic disciplines, which they regard simply as the remnants of modernity .

1. The postmodernist musical attitude

Postmodernism in music is not a distinct musical style, but rather refers to music of the postmodern era. Postmodernist music, on the other hand, shares characteristics with postmodernist art—that is, art that comes after and reacts against modernism (see Modernism in Music).

Fredric Jameson, a major figure in the thinking on postmodernism and culture, calls postmodernism "the cultural dominant of the logic of late capitalism" , meaning that, through globalization, postmodern culture is tied inextricably with capitalism (Mark Fisher, writing 20 years later, goes further, essentially calling it the sole cultural possibility ). Drawing from Jameson and other theorists, David Beard and Kenneth Gloag argue that, in music, postmodernism is not just an attitude but also an inevitability in the current cultural climate of fragmentation . As early as 1938, Theodor Adorno had already identified a trend toward the dissolution of "a culturally dominant set of values" , citing the commodification of all genres as beginning of the end of genre or value distinctions in music .

In some respects, Postmodern music could be categorized as simply the music of the postmodern era, or music that follows aesthetic and philosophical trends of postmodernism, but with Jameson in mind, it is clear these definitions are inadequate. As the name suggests, the postmodernist movement formed partly in reaction to the ideals of modernism, but in fact postmodern music is more to do with functionality and the effect of globalization than it is with a specific reaction, movement, or attitude . In the face of capitalism, Jameson says, "It is safest to grasp the concept of the postmodern as an attempt to think the present historically in an age that has forgotten how to think historically in the first place" .

Jonathan Kramer posits the idea (following Umberto Eco and Jean-François Lyotard) that postmodernism (including musical postmodernism) is less a surface style or historical period (i.e., condition) than an attitude. Kramer enumerates 16 (arguably subjective) "characteristics of postmodern music, by which I mean music that is understood in a postmodern manner, or that calls forth postmodern listening strategies, or that provides postmodern listening experiences, or that exhibits postmodern compositional practices." According to , postmodern music:

is not simply a repudiation of modernism or its continuation, but has aspects of both a break and an extension

is, on some level and in some way, ironic

does not respect boundaries between sonorities and procedures of the past and of the present

challenges barriers between 'high' and 'low' styles

shows disdain for the often unquestioned value of structural unity

questions the mutual exclusivity of elitist and populist values

avoids totalizing forms (e.g., does not want entire pieces to be tonal or serial or cast in a prescribed formal mold)

considers music not as autonomous but as relevant to cultural, social, and political contexts

includes quotations of or references to music of many traditions and cultures

considers technology not only as a way to preserve and transmit music but also as deeply implicated in the production and essence of music

embraces contradictions

distrusts binary oppositions

includes fragmentations and discontinuities

encompasses pluralism and eclecticism

presents multiple meanings and multiple temporalities

locates meaning and even structure in listeners, more than in scores, performances, or composers Daniel Albright summarizes the main tendencies of musical postmodernism as :

Bricolage

Polystylism

Randomness

2. Timescale

One author has suggested that the emergence of postmodern music in popular music occurred in the late 1960s, influenced in part by psychedelic rock and one or more of the later Beatles albums . Beard and Gloag support this position, citing Jameson's theory that "the radical changes of musical styles and languages throughout the 1960s [are] now seen as a reflection of postmodernism" (; see also ). Others have placed the beginnings of postmodernism in the arts, with particular reference to music, at around 1930 (; ).

3. Musicians cited as important to postmodern music

3.1. Western art music ("classical") composers

John Adams (; )

Thomas Adès

Robert Ashley

Luciano Berio (; ) (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Harrison Birtwistle

William Bolcom

Hans-Jürgen von Bose

Pierre Boulez (; ; ; ) (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Henry Brant

Earle Brown

John Cage (; ) (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Cornelius Cardew

Elliott Carter

Aldo Clementi

John Corigliano

Hans-Christian von Dadelsen

Brian Eno

Morton Feldman

Brian Ferneyhough (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Philip Glass (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Vinko Globokar

Heiner Goebbels

Michael Gordon

Peter Gordon

Henryk Górecki

Hans Werner Henze

Charles Ives (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Ben Johnston

Mauricio Kagel

Wilhelm Killmayer

Zygmunt Krauze

David Lang

Anne LeBaron

René Leibowitz

György Ligeti

Olivier Messiaen

Beata Moon

Detlev Müller-Siemens

Luigi Nono

Michael Nyman

Pauline Oliveros (; )

John Oswald

Harry Partch

Bernard Rands

Steve Reich (; ; ) (Also cited as a modernist composer)

Wolfgang Rihm

Terry Riley

George Rochberg

Alfred Schnittke

Wolfgang von Schweinitz

Juan María Solare

Karlheinz Stockhausen (; ; ; ) (Also cited as a modernist composer)

John Tavener

Manfred Trojahn

Trevor Wishart

Christian Wolff

Charles Wuorinen

Iannis Xenakis

La Monte Young

John Zorn

3.2. "Popular music" performers cited as important to postmodern music

Bad Religion

David Bowie

Michael Jackson

Madonna

Talking Heads

Frank Zappa

4. See also

20th-century classical music

21st-century classical music

5. References

6. Further reading