Robben Island () is an island in Table Bay, 6.9 km west of the coast of Bloubergstrand, Cape Town, South Africa. The name is Dutch for "seal island". Robben Island is roughly oval in shape, 3.3 km long north-south, and 1.9 km wide, with an area of 5.07 km². It is flat and only a few metres above sea level, as a result of an ancient erosion event. The island is composed of Precambrian metamorphic rocks belonging to the Malmesbury Group.

Robben Island is internationally known for the fact that Nobel Laureate and former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was imprisoned on Robben Island for 18 of the 27 years he served behind bars before the fall of apartheid. Kgalema Motlanthe, who also served as President of South Africa, spent 10 years on Robben Island as a political prisoner, as did the current President of South Africa Jacob Zuma.

Robben Island is both a South African National Heritage Site as well as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

1. History

Since the end of the 17th century, Robben Island has been used for the isolation of mainly political prisoners. The Dutch settlers were the first to use Robben Island as a prison. Its first prisoner was probably Harry die strandloper (Autshumao) in the mid-17th century. Among its early permanent inhabitants were political leaders from various Dutch colonies, including Indonesia, and the leader of the mutiny on the slave ship Meermin.

After the British Royal Navy captured several Dutch East Indiamen at the battle of Saldanha Bay in 1781, a boat rowed out to meet the British warships. On board were the "kings of Ternate and Tidore, and the princes of the respective families". The Dutch had long held them on "Isle Robin", but then had moved them to Saldanha Bay.

In 1806 the Scottish whaler John Murray opened a whaling station at a sheltered bay on the north-eastern shore of the island which became known as Murray's Bay, adjacent to the site of the present-day harbour named Murray's Bay Harbour which was constructed in 1939–40.

After a failed uprising at Grahamstown in 1819, the fifth of the Xhosa Wars, the British colonial government sentenced African leader Makanda Nxele to life imprisonment on the island. He drowned on the shores of Table Bay after escaping the prison.

The island was also used as a leper colony and animal quarantine station. Starting in 1845 lepers from the Hemel-en-Aarde (heaven and earth) leper colony near Caledon were moved to Robben Island when Hemel-en-Aarde was found unsuitable as a leper colony. Initially this was done on a voluntary basis and the lepers were free to leave the island if they so wished. In April 1891 the cornerstones for 11 new buildings to house lepers were laid. After the introduction of the Leprosy Repression Act in May 1892 admission was no longer voluntary and the movement of the lepers was restricted. Prior to 1892 an average of about 25 lepers a year were admitted to Robben Island, but in 1892 that number rose to 338, and in 1893 a further 250 were admitted.

During the Second World War the island was fortified and BL 9.2-inch guns and 6-inch guns were installed as part of the defences for Cape Town.

Robben Island was used as a prison for political prisoners and convicted criminals from 1961. It was a maximum security prison for political prisoners until 1991. The medium security prison for criminal prisoners was closed in 1996.

In the South African general election, 2009, the Democratic Alliance won the island.

2. Maritime peril

Robben Island and nearby Whale Rock have been the nemeses of many a ship and its crew. The surf of the open Atlantic Ocean thunders continuously at its margins and any vessel wrecked on the reefs offshore is soon beaten to pieces and disappears. In the latter half of the 17th century a Dutch ship laden with gold coins earmarked for the payment of the salaries of employees of the Dutch East India Company in Batavia (now Jakarta, Indonesia) disintegrated on these reefs a short distance offshore, in relatively shallow but very restless waters. The gold today would be worth tens of millions of euros or US dollars. A few coins have washed ashore over the centuries but the treasure itself remains in the ocean. It is protected largely by the almost ceaseless and violent surf. Many other vessels have been wrecked around the island.

3. Today

Today the island is a popular tourist destination and was declared a World Heritage Site in 1999. It is reached by ferry from the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront in Cape Town and is open throughout the year, weather permitting, and tours of the island and prison are led by guides who were formerly prisoners there. Robben Island Museum (RIM) operates as a site or living museum. All the land on the island is owned by the State, with the exception of the island church.

3.1. Robben Island lighthouse

Jan van Riebeeck first set a navigation aid at the top of Fire Hill (now Minto Hill), the highest point on the island. Huge bonfires were lit at night to warn VOC ships of the rocks that surround the island. The current Robben Island lighthouse, built on Minto Hill in 1864, is high and was converted to electricity in 1938. It is the only South African lighthouse to utilise a flashing light instead of a revolving light. Its light is visible for 24 nautical miles.

3.2. Moturu Kramat

The Moturu Kramat, a sacred site for Muslim pilgrimage on Robben Island, was built in 1969 to commemorate Sayed Abdurahman Moturu, the Prince of Madura. Moturu, one of Cape Town's first imams, who was exiled to the island in the mid-1740s and died there in 1754. Muslim political prisoners would pay homage at the shrine before leaving the island.

4. Animal life

When the Dutch arrived in the area in 1652, the only large animals on the island were seals and birds, principally penguins. In 1654, the settlers released rabbits on the island to provide a ready source of meat for passing ships. The original colony of African penguins on the island was completely exterminated by 1800. However the modern day island is once again an important breeding area for the species after a new colony established itself there in 1983. The colony has grown to 13,000 and is now the third largest for the species. The penguins are easy to see close up in their natural habitat and are therefore a popular tourist attraction.

Around 1958, Lieutenant Peter Klerck, a naval officer serving on the island, introduced various animals. The following extract of an article, written by Michael Klerck who lived on the island from an early age, describes the fauna life there:

There may be 25,000 rabbits on the island. Humans are hunting and culling the rabbits to reduce their number.

5. List of former prisoners held at Robben Island

Autshumato, one of the first activists against colonialism

Dennis Brutus, former activist and poet

Patrick Chamusso, former activist of the African National Congress

Laloo Chiba, former accused at Little Rivonia Trial

Eddie Daniels (political activist)

Jerry Ekandjo, Namibian politician

Nceba Faku, former Metro Mayor of Port Elizabeth

Petrus Iilonga, Namibian trade unionist, activist and politician

Ahmed Kathrada, former Rivonia Trialist and long-serving prisoner

Koesaaij, Malagasy co-leader of the Meermin slave mutiny in February, 1766

Langalibalele, one of the first Activists against colonialism

John Kenneth Malatji, former activist and special forces of ANC - Tladi, Soweto

Njongonkulu Ndungane, later to become Archbishop of Cape Town

Mosiuoa Lekota, imprisoned in 1974, President and Leader of the Congress of the People

Mac Maharaj, former accused at Little Rivonia Trial

Makana, one of the activists against colonialism

Nelson Mandela, African National Congress leader and former President of South Africa (first black president)

Gamzo Mandierd, activist

Jeff Masemola, the first prisoner sentenced to life imprisonment in the apartheid era

Amos Masondo, former Mayor of Johannesburg

Massavana, Malagasy leader of the Meermin slave mutiny in February, 1766

Michael Matsobane, leader of Young African Religious Movement. Sentenced at Bethal in 1979; released by PW Botha in 1987.

Chief Maqoma, former chief who died on the island in 1873

Govan Mbeki, father of former President of South Africa Thabo Mbeki. Govan was sentenced to life in 1963 but was released from Robben Island in 1987 by PW Botha

Wilton Mkwayi, former accused at Little Rivonia Trial

Murphy Morobe, Soweto Uprising student leader

Dikgang Moseneke, Deputy Chief Justice of South Africa

Sayed Adurohman Moturu, the Muslim Iman who was exiled on the island and died there in 1754

Griffiths Mxenge, a South African Lawyer and member of the African National Congress

Billy Nair, former Rivonia Trialist and ANC/SACP leader

M. D. Naidoo, a South African lawyer and member of the African National Congress

John ya Otto Nankudhu, Namibian liberation fighter

John Nkosi Serving life but released by PW Botha in 1987

Nongqawuse, the Xhosa prophetess responsible for the Cattle Killing

Maqana Nxele, former Xhosa prophet who drowned while trying to escape

John Nyathi Pokela, co-founder and former chairman of the PAC

Joe Seremane, current chairperson of the Democratic Alliance.

Tokyo Sexwale, businessman and aspirant leader of the African National Congress

Gaus Shikomba, Namibian politician

Walter Sisulu, former ANC Activist

Stone Sizani, ANC Chief Whip

Robert Sobukwe, former leader of the PAC

Andimba Toivo ya Toivo, Namibian politician

Jacob Zuma, President of South Africa and leader of the African National Congress

Achmad Cassiem

Setsiba Paul Mohohlo, former APLA unit commander

Micheal Ludumo Buka, former ANC Activist

Kgalema Motlanthe, South Africa's first Pedi president

John Aifheli Thabo, an ANC political activist

6. See also

7. References

8. Further reading

9. External links

—research paper