Transylvania (Romanian: Ardeal or Transilvania, Hungarian: Erdély, German: Siebenbürgen, Latin: Transsilvania) is a historical region in the central part of Romania. Bounded on the east and south by the Carpathian mountain range, historical Transylvania extended in the west to the Apuseni Mountains; however, the term sometimes encompasses not only Transylvania proper, but also the historical regions of Crișana, Maramureș, and Romanian part of Banat. The region of Transylvania is known for the scenic beauty of its Carpathian landscape and its rich history. In the English-speaking world it has been commonly associated with vampires, chiefly due to the influence of Bram Stoker's famous novel Dracula as well as the many later film adaptations.

1. Etymology

In Romanian, the region is known as Ardeal () or Transilvania (); in Hungarian as Erdély (); in German as Siebenbürgen (); and in Turkish as Transilvanya () but historically as Erdel or Erdehstan; see also other denominations.

Transylvania was first referred to in a Medieval Latin document in 1075 as ultra silvam, meaning "beyond the forest" (ultra (+accusative) meaning "beyond" or "on the far side of" and the accusative case of sylva (sylvam) "woods, forest"). Transylvania, with an alternative Latin prepositional prefix, means "on the other side of the woods". Hungarian historians claim that the Medieval Latin form Ultrasylvania, later Transylvania, was a direct translation from the Hungarian form Erdő-elve (rather than the Hungarian being derived from the Latin). That also was used as an alternative name in German überwald (13-14th centuries) and Ukrainian Залісся (Zalesja).

The German name Siebenbürgen means "seven fortresses", after the seven (ethnic German) Transylvanian Saxons' cities in the region. This is also the origin of the region's name in many other languages, such as the Polish Siedmiogród and the Ukrainian Семигород (Semyhorod).

The Hungarian form Erdély was first mentioned in the 12th-century Gesta Hungarorum as Erdeuleu (in modern script Erdőelü). Erdel, Erdil, Erdehstan, the Turkish equivalents, were borrowed from this form as well.

The first known written occurrence of the Romanian name Ardeal appeared in a document in 1432 as Ardeliu.

2. History

Transylvania has been dominated by several different peoples and countries throughout its history. It was once the nucleus of the Kingdom of Dacia (82 BC–106 AD). In 106 AD the Roman Empire conquered the territory, systematically exploiting its resources. After the Roman legions withdrew in 271 AD, it was overrun by a succession of various tribes, bringing it under the control of the Carpi (Dacian tribe), Visigoths, Huns, Gepids, Avars, Slavs and Bulgarians. It is a subject of dispute whether elements of the mixed Daco–Roman population survived in Transylvania through the Dark Ages (becoming the ancestors of modern Romanians) or the first Vlachs/Romanians appeared in the area in the 13th century after a northward migration from the Balkan Peninsula. There is an ongoing scholarly debate over the ethnicity of Transylvania's population before the Hungarian conquest (see Origin of the Romanians). The Magyars conquered much of Central Europe at the end of the 9th century. According to Gesta Hungarorum, Transylvania was ruled by Vlach voivode Gelou after the Hungarians arrived. The Kingdom of Hungary established a partial control over Transylvania in 1003, when king Stephen I, according to legend, defeated the prince named Gyula. Transylvania was occupied by Hungarians in several stages between the 10th and 13th centuries Between 1003 and 1526, Transylvania was a voivodeship in the Kingdom of Hungary, led by a voivode appointed by the King of Hungary. After the Battle of Mohács in 1526, Transylvania became part of the Kingdom of János Szapolyai which, in 1571, was transformed into the Principality of Transylvania ruled primarily by Calvinist Hungarian-speaking princes. However, ethnic groups that lived in this principality also included numerous Romanians and Germans. For most of this period, Transylvania, maintaining its internal autonomy, was under the suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire.

The Habsburgs acquired the territory shortly after the Battle of Vienna in 1683. In 1687, the rulers of Transylvania recognized the suzerainty of the Habsburg emperor Leopold I, and the region was officially attached to the Habsburg Empire. The Habsburgs acknowledged Principality of Transylvania as one of the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen, but the territory of principality was administratively separated from Habsburg Hungary and subjected to the direct rule of the emperor's governors. In 1699 the Turks legally conceded their loss of Transylvania in the Treaty of Karlowitz; however, some anti-Habsburg elements within the principality submitted to the emperor only in the 1711 Peace of Szatmár. After the Ausgleich of 1867, the Principality of Transylvania was abolished and its territory was absorbed into Transleithania or the Hungarian part of the newly established Austro-Hungarian Empire.

Following defeat in World War I, Austria-Hungary disintegrated. The ethnic Romanian majority in Transylvania elected representatives, who then proclaimed Union with Romania on December 1, 1918. The Proclamation of Union of Alba Iulia was adopted by the Deputies of the Romanians from Transylvania, and supported one month later by the vote of the Deputies of the Saxons from Transylvania. In 1920, the Treaty of Trianon as a result of the war, established a new border between Romania and Hungary, leaving the whole of Transylvania within the Romanian state. Hungary protested against the new borders, as over 1,600,000 Hungarian people (who were a minority in Transylvania in comparison with 2,800,000 Romanians) were living on the Romanian side of the border, mainly in Székely Land of Eastern Transylvania, and along the newly created border. In August 1940, Hungary gained about 40% of Transylvania by the Vienna Award, with the aid of Germany and Italy. That territory was assigned back to Romania in 1945 and this was confirmed in the 1947 Paris Peace Treaties.

3. Geography and ethnography

The Transylvanian plateau, 300 to 500 metres (1,000-1,600 feet) high, is drained by the Mureș, Someș, Criș, and Olt rivers, as well as other tributaries of the Danube. This core of historical Transylvania roughly corresponds with nine counties of modern Romania. Other areas to the west and north, which also united with Romania in 1918 (inside the border established by peace treaties in 1919-20), are since that time widely considered part of Transylvania.

Transylvania proper:

Amlaș

Țara Bârsei (Burzenland/Barcaság)

Chioar

Făgăraș (Fogaras)

Hațeg

Kalotaszeg (Țara Călatei)

Mărginimea Sibiului

The Transylvanian Plain (Câmpia Transilvaniei/Mezőség)

Székely Land

Țara Moților

Țara Năsăudului (Nösnerland/Naszód vidéke)

Ținutul Pădurenilor

Banat

Crișana

Țara Zarandului

Maramureș

Țara Lǎpușului

Țara Oașului See also Administrative divisions of the Kingdom of Hungary. In common reference, the Western border of Transylvania has come to be identified with the present Romanian-Hungarian border, settled in the Treaty of Trianon, although geographically the two are not identical.

4. Administrative divisions

The area of the historical Voivodeship is .

The regions granted to Romania in 1920 covered 23 counties including nearly (102,787–103,093 km² in Hungarian sources and 102,200 km² in contemporary Romanian documents). Nowadays, due to the several administrative reorganisations, the territory covers 16 counties (Romanian: judeţ), with an area of , in central and northwest Romania.

The 16 counties are: Alba, Arad, Bihor, Bistriţa-Năsăud, Brașov, Caraș-Severin, Cluj, Covasna, Harghita, Hunedoara, Maramureș, Mureș, Sălaj, Satu Mare, Sibiu, and Timiș.

The most populous cities (as of 2011 census):

Transylvania proper:

Cluj-Napoca (324,576)

Brașov (253,200)

Sibiu (147,245)

Târgu Mureș (134,290)

Banat:

Timișoara (319,279)

Reșița (73,282)

Crișana:

Oradea (196,367)

Arad (159,074)

Maramureș:

Baia Mare (123,738)

Satu Mare (102,411)

5. Population

5.1. Historical population

Official censuses with information on Transylvania's population have been conducted since the 18th century. On May 1, 1784 the Emperor Joseph II called for the first official census of the Habsburg Empire, including Transylvania. The data was published in 1787, and this census showed only the overall population (1,440,986 inhabitants). Fényes Elek, a 19th-century Hungarian statistician, estimated in 1842 that in the population of Transylvania for the years 1830-1840 the majority were 62.3% Romanians and 23.3% Hungarians.

The first official census in Transylvania that made a distinction between nationalities (distinction made on the basis of mother tongue) was performed by Austro-Hungarian authorities in 1869, distributed among the ethnic groups as follows: Romanians 59.0%, Hungarians 24.9%, Germans 11.9%.

In the last quarter of the 19th century, the Hungarian population of Transylvania increased from 24.9% in 1869 to 31.6%, as indicated in the 1910 Hungarian census. At the same time, the percentage of Romanian population decreased from 59.0% to 53.8% and the percentage of German population decreased from 11.9% to 10.7%, for a total population of 5,262,495. Magyarization policies greatly contributed to this shift.

The percentage of Romanian majority has significantly increased since the union of Transylvania with Romania after World War I in 1918. The proportion of Hungarians in Transylvania was in steep decline as more of the region's inhabitants moved into urban areas, where the pressure to assimilate and Romanianize was greater. The expropriation of the estates of Magyar magnates, the distribution of the lands to the Romanian peasants, and the policy of cultural Romanianization that followed the Treaty of Trianon were major causes of friction between Hungary and Romania. Other factors include the emigration of non-Romanian peoples, assimilation and internal migration within Romania (estimates show that between 1945 and 1977, some 630,000 people moved from the Old Kingdom to Transylvania, and 280,000 from Transylvania to the Old Kingdom, most notably to Bucharest).

5.2. Current population

The 2002 census classified Transylvania as the entire region of Romania west of the Carpathians. This region has a population of 7,221,733, with a large Romanian majority (75.9%). There are also sizeable Hungarian (19.6%), Roma (3.3%), German (0.7%) and Serb (0.1%) communities. The ethnic Hungarian population of Transylvania, largely composed of Székely, form a majority in the counties of Covasna and Harghita.

6. Economy

Transylvania is rich in mineral resources, notably lignite, iron, lead, manganese, gold, copper, natural gas, salt and sulfur.

There are large iron and steel, chemical, and textile industries. Stock raising, agriculture, wine production and fruit growing are important occupations. Timber is another valuable resource.

IT, electronics and automotive industries are important in urban and university centers like Cluj-Napoca (Nokia), Timișoara (Alcatel-Lucent, Flextronics and Continental AG), Brașov, Sibiu, Oradea and Arad.

Native brands include: Roman of Brașov (trucks and buses), Azomureș of Târgu Mureș (fertilizers), Terapia of Cluj-Napoca (pharmaceuticals), Banca Transilvania of Cluj-Napoca (finance), Romgaz and Transgaz of Mediaș (natural gas), Jidvei of Alba county (alcoholic beverages), Timişoreana of Timișoara (alcoholic beverages) and others.

Transylvania accounts for around 35% of Romania's GDP, and has a GDP per capita (PPP) of around $11,500, around 10% higher than the Romanian average.

7. Tourist attractions

Bran Castle, also known as Dracula's Castle

The medieval cities of Alba Iulia, Cluj-Napoca, Sibiu (European Capital Of Culture in 2007), Târgu Mureș and Sighișoara (UNESCO World Heritage Site and alleged birthplace of Vlad Dracula)

The city of Brașov and the nearby Poiana Brașov ski resort

The city of Hunedoara with the 14th century Hunyadi Castle

The citadel and the Art Nouveau city centre of Oradea

The Densus Church, the oldest church in Romania in which services are still officiated

The Dacian Fortresses of the Orăştie Mountains, including Sarmizegetusa Regia (UNESCO World Heritage Site)

including Sarmizegetusa Ulpia Traiana, Porolissum, Apulum, Potaissa and Drobeta

The Maramureș region

The Merry Cemetery of Săpânţa (the only of that kind in the world)

The Wooden Churches (UNESCO World Heritage Site)

The cities of Baia Mare and Sighetu Marmaţiei

The villages in the Iza, Mara, and Viseu valleys

The Saxon fortified churches (UNESCO World Heritage Site)

Romanian traditions and folk culture, ASTRA National Museum Complex, Sibiu

Hungarian traditions and folk culture

The cafe culture, street theatre and cosmopolitan society of Sibiu, Cluj-Napoca and Timișoara

The Apuseni Mountains:

Țara Moților

The Bears Cave

Scarisoara Ice Cave, in Alba County, the third largest glacier cave in the world

The Rodna Mountains

7.1. Festivals and events

7.1.1. Film festivals

ALTER-NATIVE - International Short Film Festival, Târgu-Mureș

Transilvania International Film Festival, Cluj-Napoca

Gay Film Nights, Cluj-Napoca

Comedy Cluj, Cluj-Napoca

Humor Film Festival, Timișoara

Timishort, Timișoara

Lună Plină, Horror and Fantasy Film Festival, Biertan

Astra Film Festival, Sibiu - Documentary film festival

7.1.2. Music festivals

TiMAF - Transilvania International Music and Art Festival, Cluj-Napoca

Festivalul Plai, Timișoara

FânFest Festival, Roșia Montană

Golden Stag Festival, Brașov

Gărâna Jazz Festival, Gărâna

Peninsula / Félsziget Festival, Târgu-Mureș - Romania's biggest music festival

Toamna Muzicală Clujeană, Cluj-Napoca

Transilvania International Guitar Festival, Cluj-Napoca

Jazz in the Park, Cluj-Napoca

Sibiu Jazz Festival, Sibiu - The oldest jazz festival in Romania

Artmania Festival, Sibiu

7.1.3. Others

Sighișoara Medieval Festival, Sighișoara

8. Historical coat of arms of Transylvania

The first heraldic representations of Transylvania date from the 16th century. One of the predominant early symbols of Transylvania was the coat of arms of Sibiu city. In 1596 Levinus Hulsius created a coat of arms for the imperial province of Transylvania, consisting of a shield party per fess, with a rising eagle in the upper field and seven hills with towers on top in the lower field. He published it in his work "Chronologia", issued in Nuremberg the same year. The seal from 1597 of Sigismund Báthory, prince of Transylvania, reproduced the new coat of arms with some slight changes: in the upper field the eagle was flanked by a sun and a moon and in the lower field the hills were replaced by simple towers.

The seal of Michael the Brave from 1600 depicts the territory of the former Dacian kingdom: Wallachia, Moldavia and Transylvania:

The black eagle (Wallachia)

The aurochs head (Moldavia)

The seven hills (Transylvania).

Over the hills there were two rampant lions affronts, supporting the trunk of a tree, as a symbol of the reunited Dacian Kingdom. The Diet of 1659 codified the representation of the privileged nations in Transylvania's coat of arms. It depicted a black turul on a blue background, representing the Hungarian nobility, a Sun and the Moon representing the Székelys, and seven red towers on a yellow background representing the seven fortified cities of the Transylvanian Saxons. The red dividing band was originally not part of the coat of arms.

Currently, unlike the counties included in it, the region of Transylvania does not have its own official coat of arms. Nonetheless, the historical coat of arms is currently present in the coat of arms of Romania, alongside the traditional coats of arms of the rest of Romania's historical regions.

File:TransilvaniaSigilium1550.png|Coat of arms of Transylvania in 1550, identical to that Sibiu city File:Coa_Transylvania_Country_History_v4.svg|Coat of arms of Transylvania, created by Levinus Hulsius in 1596 File:SigismundBathory1597.jpg|Coat of arms of Sigismund Báthory from 1597, including the arms of Transylvania File:Stema Mihai Viteazul.jpg|Coat of arms of Michael the Brave, ruler of Transylvania, Wallachia and Moldova, 1600

9. In culture

Following the publication of Emily Gerard's The Land Beyond the Forest (1888), Bram Stoker wrote his gothic horror novel Dracula in 1897, using Transylvania as a setting. With its success, Transylvania became associated in the English-speaking world with vampires. Since then it has been represented in fiction and literature as a land of mystery and magic. For example, in Paulo Coelho's novel The Witch of Portobello, the main character, Sherine Khalil, is described as a Transylvanian orphan with a Romani mother, in an effort to add to the character's exotic mystique. The so-called Transylvanian trilogy of historical novels by Miklos Banffy, The Writing on the Wall, is an extended treatment of the 19th- and early 20th-century social and political history of the country. Among the first actors to portray Bram Stoker's Dracula in film was Bela Lugosi, who was born in Banat, in present-day Romania.

The Munsters were also said to be from Transylvania, referring to it several time in the show both by name and as "The Old Country".

10. Gallery

File:Sarmizegetusa Regia - Sanctuarul mare circular. (Zona sacra).jpg|Sarmizegetusa Regia, capital of ancient Dacia File:Castrum Apulum 2011 - Porta Principalis Dextra-1.jpg|Roman city of Apulum File:Turla Biserica Sfântul Nicolae din Densuș.jpg|Densuș church File:Bran Castle TB1.jpg|Bran Castle File:Saint Michael Roman-Catholic Church.jpg|St. Michael's Church, Cluj-Napoca File:Large Square Sibiu-Romania.jpg|Grand Square, Sibiu File:Pictorial Sighisoara.jpg|Sighișoara clock tower File:Timisoara - Union Square at sunrise.jpg|Union Square, Timișoara File:Municipality of arad.jpg|Administrative Palace in Arad File:Turnul Stefan.jpg|Stephen's Tower in Baia Mare File:Catedrala Ortodoxă "Sf. Treime" (Reîntregirii Neamului).jpg|Coronation Cathedral, Alba Iulia File:RO HD Hunedoara castle panorama 4.jpg|Hunyad Castle in Hunedoara File:Castelul Regal de la Savarsin3.jpg|Săvârșin Royal Castle File:Brukenthal-sibiu.jpg|Brukenthal National Museum in Sibiu File:Biertan church with protecting walls.jpg|Fortified church in Biertan File:Sârbi Josani.jpg|Wooden church of Maramureș File:Mikó vár Csíkszereda.jpg|Mikó Castle in Miercurea Ciuc File:Megyehaza Vasarhely.JPG|Mureș County Prefecture in Târgu Mureș

11. See also

Prehistory of Transylvania

Siebenbürgenlied

12. References

K. Horedt (1958) Contribuţii la istoria Transilvaniei în secolele IV-XIII, Editura Academiei RSR, 1958 p. 113

13. Further reading

Patrick Leigh Fermor, Between the Woods and the Water (New York Review of Books Classics, 2005; ISBN 1-59017-166-7). Fermor travelled across Transylvania in the summer of 1934, and wrote about it in this account first published more than 50 years later, in 1986.

Zoltán Farkas and Judit Sós,

András Bereznay, Erdély történetének atlasza (Historical Atlas of Transylvania), with text and 102 map plates, the first ever historical atlas of Transylvania (Méry Ratio, 2011; ISBN 978-80-89286-45-4)

14. External links

, Katherine Lovatt, in Central Europe Review, Vol 1, No 14 27 September 1999.

by Dr. Konrad Gündisch, Oldenburg, Germany

, by Charles Boner, 1865