The Third Culture is a 1995 book by John Brockman which discusses the work of several well-known scientists who are directly communicating their new, sometimes provocative, ideas to the general public. John Brockman has continued the themes of 'The Third Culture' in the website of the Edge Foundation, where leading scientists and thinkers contribute their thoughts in plain English.

The title of the book refers to Charles Percy Snow's 1959 work The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution, which described the conflict between the cultures of the humanities and science.

1. Contents

Twenty-three people were included in the 1995 book:

physicist Paul Davies

biologist Richard Dawkins

philosopher Daniel Dennett

paleontologist Niles Eldredge

chaos theorist J. Doyne Farmer

theoretical physicist Murray Gell-Mann

biologist Brian Goodwin

geologist/biologist Stephen Jay Gould

physicist Alan Guth

inventor W. Daniel Hillis

theoretical psychologist Nicholas Humphrey

geneticist Steve Jones

biologist Stuart Kauffman

complex systems specialist Christopher Langton

biologist Lynn Margulis

mathematician and computer scientist Marvin Minsky

mathematical physicist Roger Penrose

cognitive scientist Steven Pinker

theoretical astrophysicist Martin Rees

cognitive scientist Roger Schank

theoretical physicist Lee Smolin

biologist Francisco Varela

evolutionary biologist George C. Williams The book influenced the reception of popular scientific literature in parts of the world beyond the United States. In Germany, the book inspired several newspapers to integrate scientific reports into their "Feuilleton" or "culture" sections (such as the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung). At the same time, the assertions of the book were discussed as a source of controversy, especially the implicit assertion that "third culture thinking" is mainly an American development. Critics acknowledge that, whereas in the Anglo-Saxon cultures there is a large tradition of scientists writing popular books, such tradition was absent for a long period in the German and French languages, with journalists often filling the gap. However, some decades ago there were also scientists, like the physicists Heisenberg and Schrödinger and the psychologist Piaget, who fulfill the criteria Brockman named for "third culture." The German author Gabor Paal suggested that the idea of the "third culture" is a rather modern version of what Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel called Realphilosophie (philosophy of the real).

Also, already during the interwar period, Otto Neurath and other members of the Vienna Circle strongly propagated the need for both the unity of science and the popularization of new scientific concepts. With the rise of the Nazis in Germany and Austria, many of the Vienna Circle's members left for the United States where they taught in several universities, causing their philosophical ideas to spread in the Anglo-Saxon world throughout the 1930s-1940s.

2. References

John Brockman, The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution, Simon & Schuster: 1995 ISBN 0-684-82344-6

Gabor Paal, Was ist schön? Ästhetik und Erkenntnis, Koenighausen & Neumann (2003), Würzburg. ISBN 3-8260-2425-7

3. Further reading

Reflections on "the Third Culture" from the editor of Wired.

4. External links