The Type IX U-boat was designed by Nazi Germany's Kriegsmarine in 1935 and 1936 as a large ocean-going submarine for sustained operations far from the home support facilities. Type IX boats were briefly used for patrols off the eastern United States in an attempt to disrupt the stream of troops and supplies bound for Europe. The extended range came at the cost of longer dive times and decreased maneuverability, which is why the smaller Type VII was produced in greater numbers and used for the bulk of operations. It was derived from the Type IA, and appeared in various sub-types.

Type IXs had six torpedo tubes; four at the bow and two at the stern. They carried six reloads internally and had five external torpedo containers (three at the stern and two at the bow) which stored ten additional torpedoes. The total of 22 torpedoes allowed U-boat commanders to follow a convoy and strike night after night. As mine-layers they could carry 44 TMA or 66 TMB mines, but many of the IXC boats were not fitted for mine operations.

Secondary armament was provided by one deck gun with 180 rounds. Anti-aircraft armament differed throughout the war. They had two periscopes in the tower. Types IXA and IXB had an additional periscope in the control room, which was removed in Type IXC and afterward.

1. Type IXA

1.1. List of Type IXA submarines

DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen built eight Type IXA U-boats.

2. Type IXB

Type IXB was an improved model with an increased range. It was the most successful version overall with each boat averaging a total of over sunk.

Notable IXB boats included commanded by Reinhard Hardegen, which opened up the attack in the US waters in early 1942 known as Operation Drumbeat, and operating off Freetown, Sierra Leone under the command of Günther Hessler, which had the most successful single mission of the war ever with close to 100,000 tonnes sunk.

2.1. List of Type IXB submarines

DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen built 14 Type IXB U-boats.

3. Type IXC

Type IXC was a further refinement of the class with storage for an additional 43 tonnes of fuel, increasing the boat's range. This series omitted the control room periscope leaving the boats with two tower scopes.

As mine-layers they could carry 44 TMA or 66 TMB mines, though through and through (35 boats), were not fitted for mine operations.

One IXC carries the distinction of being the only U-boat sunk in the Gulf of Mexico, .

U-505 survives at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, and as of 2005 has been completely renovated.

3.1. List of Type IXC submarines

DeSchiMAG AG Weser and Seebeckwerft of Bremen, and Deutsche Werft of Hamburg built 54 Type IXC submarines.

4. Type IXC/40

Type IXC/40 was an improved Type IXC with slightly increased range and surfaced speed. The remains of are on display at Woodside Ferry Terminal, Birkenhead.

4.1. List of Type IXC/40 submarines

DeSchiMAG AG Weser and Seebeckwerft of Bremen, and Deutsche Werft of Hamburg, built 87 of this type.

5. Type IXD

Type IXD was significantly longer and heavier than the IXC/40. It was faster than the IXC but at the cost of slightly reduced range. They had three pairs of Daimler Benz diesels: two pairs for cruise and one for high speed or battery recharge. There were three variants: the IXD1, IXD2 and IXD/42. The IXD1 had unreliable engines and they were later converted for use in surface transport vessels. The IXD2 comprised most of the class and had a range of . The IXD/42, was almost identical but with more engine power (5,400 ehp instead of 4,400).

In 1943 and 1944 the torpedo tubes were removed from a number of IXD boats converted for transport use. In their new role they could transport 252 tonnes of cargo. The range was extended to .

5.1. List of Type IXD submarines

DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen built 30 Type IXD U-boats.

Several Type IXD/42 U-boats were contracted to be built DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen, but only two were commissioned. They were:

was launched on April 28, 1944 and commissioned March 27, 1945. Her career ended in Operation Deadlight.

was launched on May 17, 1944 but was badly damaged on March 30, 1945 by US bombs while still in the dockyard.

, , and were laid down but construction halted on September 30, 1943 when all IXD/42 contracts were cancelled.

6. See also

7. References

;Notes ;Bibliography