The University of California, Santa Cruz (also known as UC Santa Cruz or UCSC), is a public, collegiate university and one of 10 campuses in the University of California system. Located 75 miles (120 km) south of San Francisco at the edge of the coastal community of Santa Cruz, the campus lies on of rolling, forested hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean and Monterey Bay.

Founded in 1965, UC Santa Cruz began as a showcase for progressive, cross-disciplinary undergraduate education, innovative teaching methods and contemporary architecture. Since then, it has evolved into a modern research university with a wide variety of both undergraduate and graduate programs, while retaining its reputation for strong undergraduate support and student political activism. The residential college system, which consists of ten small colleges, is intended to combine the student support of a small college with the resources of a major university (this concept is not unlike that at southern California's private Claremont Colleges, which was implemented 40 years earlier with five small colleges).

1. History

Although some of the original founders had already outlined plans for an institution like UCSC as early as the 1930s, the opportunity to realize their vision did not present itself until the City of Santa Cruz made a bid to the University of California Regents in the mid-1950s to build a campus just outside town, in the foothills of the Santa Cruz Mountains. The Santa Cruz site was selected over a competing proposal to build the campus closer to the population center of San Jose. Santa Cruz was selected for the beauty, rather than the practicality, of its location, however, and its remoteness led to the decision to develop a residential college system that would house most of the students on-campus. The formal design process of the Santa Cruz campus began in the late 1950s, culminating in the Long Range Development Plan of 1963. Construction had started by 1964, and the University was able to accommodate its first students (albeit living in trailers on what is now the East Field athletic area) in 1965. The campus was intended to be a showcase for contemporary architecture, progressive teaching methods, and undergraduate research. According to founding chancellor Dean McHenry, the purpose of the distributed college system was to combine the benefits of a major research university with the intimacy of a smaller college. UC President Clark Kerr shared a passion with former Stanford roommate McHenry to build a university modeled as "several Swarthmores" (i.e., small liberal arts colleges) in close proximity to each other. Roads on campus were named after UC Regents who voted in favor of building the campus.

1.1. Impact on Santa Cruz

Although the city of Santa Cruz already exhibited a strong conservation ethic before the founding of the university, the coincidental rise of the counterculture of the 1960s with the university's establishment fundamentally altered its subsequent development. Early student and faculty activism at UCSC pioneered an approach to environmentalism that greatly impacted the industrial development of the surrounding area. The lowering of the voting age to 18 in 1971 led to the emergence of a powerful student-voting bloc. A large and growing population of politically liberal UCSC alumni changed the electorate of the town from predominantly Republican to markedly left-leaning, consistently voting against expansion measures on the part of both town and gown.

1.2. Expansion plans

Plans for increasing enrollment over the next 14 years to 19,500 students, adding 1,500 faculty and staff, and, secondarily the anticipated environmental impacts of such action encountered opposition from the city, the local community, and the student body. City voters in 2006 passed two measures calling on UCSC to pay for the impacts of campus growth. A Santa Cruz Superior Court judge invalidated the measures, ruling they were improperly put on the ballot. In 2008, the university, city, county and neighborhood organizations reached an agreement to set aside numerous lawsuits and allow the expansion to occur. UCSC agreed to local government scrutiny of its north campus expansion plans, to provide housing for 67 percent of the additional students on campus, and to pay municipal development and water fees.

George Blumenthal, UCSC's 10th Chancellor, intends to mitigate growth constraints in Santa Cruz by developing off-campus sites in Silicon Valley. The NASA Ames Research Center campus is planned to ultimately hold 2,000 UCSC students – about 10% of the entire university's future student body as envisioned for 2020.

In April 2010, UC Santa Cruz opened its new $35 million Digital Arts Research Center; a project in planning since 2004.

2. Campus

The UCSC campus is located south of San Francisco, in the Ben Lomond Mountain ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains. Elevation varies from at the campus entrance to at the northern boundary, a difference of about . The southern portion of the campus primarily consists of a large, open meadow, locally known as the Great Meadow. To the north of the meadow lie most of the campus' buildings, many of them among redwood groves. The campus is bounded on the south by the city's upper-west-side neighborhoods, on the east by Harvey West Park and the Pogonip open space preserve, on the north by Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park near the town of Felton, and on the west by Gray Whale Ranch, a portion of Wilder Ranch State Park. The campus is built on a portion of the Cowell Family ranch, which was purchased by the University of California in 1961. The northern half of the campus property has remained in its undeveloped, forested state apart from fire roads and hiking and bicycle trails. The heavily forested area has allowed UC Santa Cruz to operate a recreational vehicle park as a form of student housing.

A number of shrines, dens and other student-built curiosities are scattered around the northern campus. These structures, mostly assembled from branches and other forest detritus, were formerly concentrated in the area known as Elfland, a glen the University razed in 1992 to build colleges Nine and Ten. Students were able to relocate and save some of the structures, however.

Creeks traverse the UCSC campus within several ravines. Footbridges span those ravines on pedestrian paths linking various areas of campus. The footbridges make it possible to walk to any part of campus within 20 minutes in spite of the campus being built on a mountainside with varying elevations. At night, orange lights illuminate the occasionally fogged-in paths.

There are a number of natural points of interest throughout the UCSC grounds. The "Porter Caves" are a popular site among students on the west side of campus. The entrance is located in the forest between the Porter College meadow and Empire Grade Road. The caves wind through a set of caverns, some of which are challenging, narrow passages. Tree Nine is another popular destination for students. A large Douglas Fir spanning approximately tall, Tree Nine is located in the upper campus of UCSC behind College Nine. The tree had been a popular climbing spot for many years but due to environmental corrosion and fear of student injuries, UC ground services sawed off the limbs to make it nearly impossible to climb. For specific directions, reference: For the less experienced tree-climber, students also frequent Sunset Tree located on the east side of the meadow behind the UCSC Music Center.

The UCSC campus is also one of the few homes to Mima Mounds in the United States. They are extremely rare in the United States and in the world in general.

3. Academics

The university offers 63 undergraduate majors and 35 minors, with graduate programs in 33 fields. Popular undergraduate majors include Art, Business Management Economics, Molecular and Cell Biology, and Psychology. Interdisciplinary programs, such as Feminist Studies, American Studies, Environmental Studies, Visual Studies, Digital Arts and New Media, and the unique History of Consciousness Department are also hosted alongside UCSC's more traditional academic departments.

A new joint program, the first of its kind in the University of California system, will enable UC Santa Cruz students to earn a bachelor's degree and law degree in six years instead of the usual seven. The “3+3 BA/JD” Program between UC Santa Cruz and UC Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco is set to accept its first applicants in Fall 2014.

UCSC students who declare their intent in their freshman or early sophomore year will complete three years at UCSC and then move on to UC Hastings to begin the three-year law curriculum. Credits from the first year of law school will count toward a student's bachelor's degree. Students who successfully complete the first-year law course work will receive their bachelor's degree and be able to graduate with their UCSC class, then continue at UC Hastings for the final two years of law study.

3.1. Research

According to the National Science Foundation, UC Santa Cruz spent $155.5 million on research and development in 2012, ranking it 120th in the nation.

Although designed as a liberal arts-oriented university, UCSC quickly acquired a graduate-level natural science research component with the appointment of plant physiologist Kenneth V. Thimann as the first provost of Crown College. Thimann developed UCSC's early Division of Natural Sciences and recruited other well-known science faculty and graduate students to the fledgling campus. Immediately upon its founding, UCSC was also granted administrative responsibility for the Lick Observatory, which established the campus as a major center for astronomy research. Founding members of the Social Science and Humanities faculty created the unique History of Consciousness graduate program in UCSC's first year of operation.

Famous former UCSC faculty members include Judith Butler and Angela Davis.

UCSC's organic farm and garden program is the oldest in the country, and pioneered organic horticulture techniques internationally.

As of 2012, UCSC's faculty and emeriti include 13 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 26 fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and 35 fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The young Baskin School of Engineering, UCSC's first professional school and home to the Expressive Intelligence Studio, and the Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering are gaining recognition, as has the work that UCSC researchers David Haussler and Jim Kent have done on the Human Genome Project, including the widely used UCSC Genome Browser. UCSC administers the National Science Foundation's Center for Adaptive Optics.

Off-campus research facilities maintained by UCSC include the Lick and Keck Observatories and the Long Marine Laboratory. In September 2003, a ten-year task order contract valued at more than $330 million was awarded by NASA Ames Research Center to the University of California to establish and operate a University Affiliated Research System (UARC). UCSC manages the UARC for the University of California.

3.2. Rankings

UC Santa Cruz was 85th in the list of Best National Universities in the United States by U.S. News & World Reports 2015 rankings. In 2013 Kiplinger ranked UC Santa Cruz 54th out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation, and 8th in California. Money Magazine ranked UC Santa Cruz 261st in the country out of the nearly 1500 schools it evaluated for its 2014 Best Colleges ranking. The Daily Beast ranked UC Santa Cruz 157th in the country out of the nearly 2000 schools it evaluated for its 2013 Best Colleges ranking. In 2012, it was ranked 67th best by Washington Monthly. In 2014–2015, UC Santa Cruz was rated 109th in the world by Times Higher Education World University Rankings. In 2014 it was ranked 93rd in the world by the Academic Ranking of World Universities and 307th worldwide in 2013 by the QS World University Rankings.

In 2009, RePEc, an online database of research economics articles, ranked the UCSC Economics Department sixth in the world in the field of international finance. In 2007, High Times magazine placed UCSC as first among US universities as a "counterculture college." In 2009, The Princeton Review (with Gamepro magazine) ranked UC Santa Cruz's Game Design major among the top 50 in the country. In 2011, The Princeton Review and Gamepro Media ranked UC Santa Cruz's graduate programs in Game Design as seventh in the nation. In 2012, UCSC was ranked No. 3 in the Most Beautiful Campus list of Princeton Review.

4. Residential colleges

The undergraduate program, with only the partial exception of those majors run through the University's School of Engineering, is still based on the version of the "residential college system" outlined by Clark Kerr and Dean McHenry at the inception of their original plans for the campus (see History, above). Upon admission, all undergraduate students have the opportunity to choose one of ten colleges, with which they usually stay affiliated for their entire undergraduate careers. There are cases where some students switch college affiliations as each college holds a different graduation ceremony. Almost all faculty members are affiliated with a college as well. The individual colleges provide housing and dining services, while the university as a whole offers courses and majors to the general student community. Other universities with similar college systems include Rice University and the University of California, San Diego.

Each of the colleges has its own, distinctive architectural style and a resident faculty provost, who is the nominal head of his or her college. An incoming first-year student will take a mandatory "core course" within his or her respective college, with a curriculum and central theme unique to that college. College resident populations vary from about 750 to 1,550 students, with roughly half of undergraduates living on campus within their college community or in smaller, intramural campus communities such as the International Living Center, the Trailer Park, and the Village. Coursework, academic majors and general areas of study are not limited by college membership, although colleges host the offices of many academic departments. Graduate students are not affiliated with a residential college, though a large portion of their offices, too, have historically tended to be based in the colleges. The ten colleges are, in order of establishment:

Image:Cowell College.jpg|Cowell College Image:Stevenson College.jpg|Stevenson College Image:Clock tower, crown college, ucsc.jpg|Crown College Image:Merrill_College.jpg|Merrill College Image:Porter College, entrance, UCSC.jpg|Porter College Image:KresgeApartmentsandLaundry.JPG|Kresge College File:Oakes College 1.jpg|Oakes College File:UCSC College Eight.jpg|College Eight Image:College 9.jpg|College Nine Image:College 10.jpg|College Ten

4.1. Admissions

For the fall 2013 term, UCSC offered admission to 20,039 freshmen out of 38,640 applicants, an acceptance rate of 51.9%. The entering freshman class had an average high school GPA of 3.66, and the middle 50% range of SAT scores were 490-630 for critical reading, 510-650 for math, and 490-630 for writing.

4.2. Grading

For most of its history, UCSC employed a unique student evaluation system. With the exception of the choice of letter grades in science courses the only grades assigned were "pass" and "no record", supplemented with narrative evaluations. Beginning in 1997, UCSC allowed students the option of selecting letter grade evaluations, but course grades were still optional until 2000, when faculty voted to require students receive letter grades. Students were still given narrative evaluations to complement the letter grades. , the narrative evaluations were deemed an unnecessary expenditure. Still, some professors write evaluations for all students while some would write evaluations for specific students upon request. Students can still elect to receive a "pass/no pass" grade, but many academic programs limit or even forbid pass/no pass grading. A grade of C and above would receive a grade of "pass". Overall, students may now earn no more than 25% of their UCSC credits on a "pass/no pass" basis. Although the default grading option for almost all courses offered is now "graded", most course grades are still accompanied by written evaluations.

5. Library

The McHenry Library houses UCSC's arts and letters collection, with most of the scientific reading at the newer Science and Engineering Library. The McHenry Library was designed by John Carl Warnecke. In addition, the colleges host smaller libraries, which serve as quiet places to study. The McHenry Special Collections Library includes the archives of Robert A. Heinlein, the largest collection of Edward Weston photographs in the country, the mycology book collection of composer John Cage, a large collection of works by Satyajit Ray, the Hayden White collection of 16th-century Italian printing, a photography collection with nearly half a million items, and the Mary Lea Shane Archive. The latter contains an extensive collection of photographs, letters, and other documents related to Lick Observatory dating back to 1870.

A new addition to the library opened on March 31, 2008, including a "cyber study" room and a Global Village café. The original library reopened on June 22, 2011 after seismic upgrades and other renovations.

5.1. Grateful Dead archive

In 2008, UCSC agreed to house the Grateful Dead archives at the McHenry Library. UCSC plans to devote an entire room at the library, to be called "Dead Central," to display the collection and encourage research. UCSC beat out petitions from Stanford and UC Berkeley to house the archives. Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir said that UCSC is "a seat of neo-Bohemian culture that we're a facet of. There could not have been a cozier place for this collection to land." Silicon Valley entrepreneurs and Dead fans Roger McNamee and Bill Watkins are expected to join a committee to oversee and raise funds for the project. The archive became open to the public July 29, 2012.

6. Student life

Though UCSC students come from throughout the United States and the world, most are from California. The following tables show the ethnic and regional breakdown of the student body:

UCSC students are known for political activism. In 2005, a Pentagon surveillance program deemed student opposition to military recruiters on campus a "credible threat," the only campus antiwar action to receive the designation. In February 2006, Chancellor Denice Denton got the designation removed. Military recruiters declined to return to UCSC the following year, but returned in 2008 to a more low-keyed student reception and protests using elements of guerrilla theatre, rather than vandalism or physical violence. Thanks to students passing a $3 quarterly tuition increase to support buying renewable energy in 2006, UCSC is the sixth-largest buyer of renewable energy among college campuses nationwide.

UC Santa Cruz is also well known for its cannabis culture. On April 20, 2007, approximately 2,000 UCSC students gathered at Porter Meadow to celebrate the annual "420". Students and others openly smoked marijuana while campus police stood by. The once student-only event has grown since the city of Santa Cruz passed Measure K in 2006, an ordinance making marijuana use a low-priority crime for police. The 2007 event attracted a total of 5,000 participants. The university does not condone the gathering, but has taken steps to regulate the event and ensure security for all participants. On April 20, 2010, the school administration shut down the west entrance to campus and limited the amount of buses that could drive through campus.

Another well known tradition is what is known as "First Rain". Students run around campus naked or nearly naked to celebrate the school year's first night of heavy rain. The run begins at Porter and proceeds to travel through all the other colleges, collecting more students in its train.

6.1. Student government

The Student Union Assembly was founded in 1985 to better coordinate bargaining positions between students and administration on campus-wide issues. All the residential colleges and six ethnic and gender-based organizations send delegates to SUA. There is a total of 138 recognized student groups .

6.2. Student media

All Student media organizations are funded by a student council referendum of $3.20 per student per quarter.

City on a Hill Press, a weekly publication that serves as the traditional campus newspaper.

Fish Rap Live!, the alternative, comedic paper.

TWANAS, the Third World and Native American Student Press Collective publishes issues about every quarter for various communities of color at UCSC. Its peak years were during the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.

Student Cable Television (SCTV) disbanded at the beginning of the 2010 academic school year. On The Spot (OTS), replaced the defunct SCTV organization, continuing the student-run television opportunities. On The Spot airs on channel 28 only on campus.

The Moxie Production Group, which produces content on a quarterly basis.

The Project, a quarterly paper, for UCSC's radical community.

The Disorientation Guide, published on sporadic years, introduces new students to UCSC's radical history and various political issues that face the campus and community.

Rapt Magazine, a quarterly literary and arts magazine.

', a Jewish student life publication.

On The Spot, a student-run broadcast media organization, that produces a variety of shows including Press Center Live (Sketch-Comedy), ART (Music videos), and game shows.

Banana Slug News, a television broadcast news program.

Chinquapin, an open-ended creative journal sponsored by the creative writing department.

Turnstile, a poetry journal.

"Gaia Magazine," a magazine about environmental and sustainability subjects that is published once a year.

Red Wheelbarrow, a "literary arts" journal.

Matchbox Magazine, an annual humanities publication, started at UCSC, that operates across many UC campuses.

, an annual student-run film journal associated with the Film and Digital Media department.

KZSC, the student-run campus radio station.

Santa Cruz Indymedia, a local activist resource with a lot of UCSC content.

The Film Production Coalition which produces films on a quarterly basis.

6.3. Housing

Most of the UCSC undergraduate housing is affiliated with one of the ten residential colleges. The residence halls, which include both shared and private rooms, typically house fifteen to twenty students per floor and have common bathrooms and lounge areas. Some halls have coed floors where men and women share bathroom facilities, others have separate bathroom facilities for men and women. Single-gender, gender-neutral and substance-free floors are also available.

All of the colleges, except for Kresge, have both residence halls and apartments. Kresge is all apartments. Apartments are typically shared by four to eight students, have common living/dining rooms, kitchens and bathrooms, and a combination of shared and private bedrooms. Apartments at colleges other than Kresge are generally reserved for students above the freshman level.

In addition to the residential colleges, housing is available at the Village on the lower quarry, populated by continuing, transfer, and graduate students; the Redwood Grove Apartments, usually available to applicants from all colleges, is reserved for Porter affiliates in 2014-15; and the University Town Center, located downtown, that primarily serves international students. The Transfer Community houses over 400 new transfer students and is located at Porter College. Graduate Student Housing is available near Science Hill, and UCSC also offers Family Student Housing units as well as a Camper Park for student-owned trailers and RVs.

6.4. Greek life

UCSC is home to few fraternities and sororities. The first Greek organization on campus, Theta Chi, was given colony status on January 10, 1987 and chartered on October 14, 1989 (designation: Theta Iota). In the beginning, fraternities like Theta Chi and Sigma Alpha Epsilon were met with strong opposition from the student body. Student groups like P.A.C. (People's Alternative Community), S.A.G.E. (Students Against Greek Environments), and M.A.C. (Men's Alternative Community) protested the existence of Greek life at the UCSC campus.

In 2003, the campus gained national notoriety when MTV's reality show Fraternity Life documented the lives of students pledging Delta Omega Chi. During the shooting, a few of the students fished a 15-year-old koi named Midas out of a pond at Porter College, barbecued it, and ate it. Since the incident was captured on video, the individuals involved were charged with misdemeanor grand theft and vandalism.

Greek life at UCSC includes fraternities Sigma Lambda Beta, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Sigma Pi, Lambda Phi Epsilon, Sigma Phi Zeta, Alpha Epsilon Pi, Pi Alpha Phi, and Delta Lambda Psi, the nation's first gender neutral queer Greek organization. Sororities on campus include Delta Sigma Theta, Sigma Lambda Gamma, Sigma Alpha Epsilon Pi, alpha Kappa Delta Phi, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Sigma Pi Alpha, Tri Chi, Sigma Omicron Pi, Kappa Zeta, and Alpha Psi. The most recent addition to Greek life at UCSC was Lambda Theta Alpha, a Latina sorority which was established in Fall 2012.

Aside from social fraternities and sororities on campus, there are also a number of professional organizations as well. There are Kappa Gamma Delta, a prehealth sorority, Sigma Mu Delta, a prehealth fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega, a coed service fraternity, Phi Alpha Delta, a pre-law fraternity, and Delta Sigma Pi, a co-ed professional business fraternity.

7. Sustainability

Though UCSC has been known for its conservation efforts and environmentally minded students since it was founded, since 2000 enthusiasm for the UCSC sustainability movement has grown steadily among students and administrators alike. Students established the in 2001, have held annual , and established a sustainability funding body, the . In 2004, the was released, stating that the was committed to minimizing its impact on the environment and reducing its dependence on non-renewable energy. This set the scene for huge breakthroughs in 2006, when a was established and a campus-wide Sustainability Assessment was completed. The following year, the pilot was created to help institutionalize sustainability, coordinate communication and collaboration between the many entities already engaged in campus sustainability activities at UCSC, support policy implementation, and serve as a resource for the campus. Sustainability has become a major part of every aspect of the campus, and students, staff, and faculty campus-wide are working toward sustainability in a variety of different ways.

7.1. History

2010–2011

Climate Action Plan moved to the Sustainability Office.

Campus Sustainability Plan revised and version 1.5 released.

New Climate Action Manager, Sustainability Internship Coordinator, and Sustainability Coordinator hired, along with near 30 student interns.

Carbon Fund launched.

Landfill and Waste Diversion Task Force established in order to achieve Zero Waste by 2020.

Pilot Sustainability Internship Program (IDEASS), hosts approximately 25–30 interns in for-credit course working on campus and community projects, collaboratively organized with Engineering and Social Sciences.

Launch of Friends of the Sustainability Office (FoSO), a student organization dedicated to train student leaders and outreach to the campus about sustainability efforts, events, and opportunities.

Launch of Students for Sustainability through Institutional Transformation and Engagement (SSITE), a student organization that focuses on policy, student professional training, and institutional change.

Creation of an online Sustainability Project Clearinghouse to document completed, ongoing, and potential sustainability projects and match students with staff and faculty partners.

Host of 3rd Annual Sustainability Celebration

Pilot of green office certification program, Program Recognizing Offices Practicing Sustainability (PROPS) completed.

Host of Inter-organization sustainability retreat, featuring over 80 student leaders.

Assessed UCSC according to AASHE’s Sustainability Tracking and Rating System (STARS). 2009–2010

Release of Campus Sustainability Plan 1.0.

New Sustainability Internship Coordinator and Climate Action Manager hired, along with 20 student interns.

Students pass fee measures to fund student engagement with the Sustainability Office and climate protection projects.

Over $180,000 in grant funding establishes IDEASS, a collaboratively organized campus and community sustainability internship program.

Host of 2nd Annual Sustainability Celebration and Planning Session.

Ongoing support for the Committee on Sustainability and Stewardship and eight associated Sustainability Working Groups.

Chancellor's Executive Committee on Sustainability and Climate Change established (replacing CCCC). 2008–2009

The Sustainability Office receives funding for the years 2009-2012.

Sustainability Coordinator promoted to Sustainability Manager.

New Sustainability Coordinator and Sustainability Project Liaison hired, along with 4 student interns.

Draft Climate Action Plan released. 2007–2008

Pilot Sustainability Office moved to Physical Planning and Construction.

Chancellor's Council on Climate Change (CCCC) launches with the help of the Sustainability Office. 2006–2007

Pilot Sustainability Office established with funding until 2009.

Sustainability Coordinator hired, along with two student interns.

Chancellor signs the Climate Action Compact and the American College and University Presidents Climate Commitment.

UC Policy on Sustainable Practices expanded.

Green Campus Program, a student internship program for energy efficiency, water conservation, and green jobs development, developed.

Committee on Sustainability and Stewardship (CSS) established, 2006.

Campus-wide Sustainability Assessment completed in 2006 1965–2006

UC Policy on Sustainable Practices released in 2004.

established in 2001.

7.2. Organizations

The following is a list of UCSC sustainability organizations, departments, gardens, and funding bodies on the UCSC campus:

Alliance to Save Energy's Power Save Green Campus Program (formerly known as Green Campus Program)

Arboretum

California Student Sustainability Coalition (CSSC)

Campus Sustainability Council (CSC)

Campus Sustainability Office

Carbon Fund

Center for Agroecology & Sustainable Food Systems

Center for Global, International and Regional Studies

College Eight: Nurturing Green Entrepreneurs

Community Agroecology Network (CAN)

Education for Sustainable Living Program (ESLP)

Environmental Studies Department

Friends of the Community Agroecology Network (FoCAN)

Friends of the Sustainability Office (FoSO)

IDEASS

Kresge Garden

Meatless Mondays, Beefless Thursdays & Farm Fridays in the dining halls

Path to a Greener Stevenson (PTAGS)

Program in Community and Agroecology (PICA)

Program Recognizing Offices Practicing Sustainability (PROPS), a green office certification program

Site Stewardship Program

Student Environmental Center (SEC)

Student Environmental Center (SEC)

UCSC Climate Change Research Resources

UCSC Greenhouses

UCSC Museum of Natural History Collections

UCSC Natural Reserves

UCSC Sustainability Engineering and Ecological Design

8. Athletics

UCSC competes in Division III of the NCAA as an Independent member. There are twelve varsity sports (men's and women's basketball, tennis, soccer, volleyball, swimming and diving, women's golf, and women's cross country). UCSC teams are nationally ranked in tennis, soccer, men's volleyball, and swimming.

By defeating Emory to win the 2007 National Championship in men's tennis, UCSC has won six men's tennis team championships. The Banana Slugs were also runners-up in men's soccer in 2004. In the 2006 season, the men's water polo team won the Division III championship, as well as an overall ranking of 19th in the nation. However, both the men and women's water polo teams were cut in 2008 due to budget constraints.

In 2012, the Men's Volleyball Team made a Division III NCAA Semifinal's appearance. In 2013, the Men's Volleyball Team qualified for a second appearance to the Division III NCAA Tournament. UCSC is one of the largest but one of the least funded NCAA Division III members.

Starting in 2013, both men's and women's basketball teams played downtown at the Kaiser Permanente Arena.

In addition to its NCAA sports, UCSC maintains a number of successful club sides including its women's rugby team, which won the Division II National Collegiate Championship during its '05–'06 season and has competed at Nationals several times since, most recently in 2010 and 2013.

UCSC also fields a men's lacrosse team, which competes against other western universities in the WCLL. After a highly successful 2008 season, the team traveled to Texas for nationals.

Although UCSC never had a track, the residential colleges regularly competed in an improvised "Slug Run" every spring from 1967 to 1982, though the Run now is a community event and fundraiser event hosted by the cross-country club for much needed fund to pay for entry fees, hotel, and transportation to race.

Approximately 25% of the student population participates in intramural athletics, which tend to be better funded than the intercollegiate athletic programs.

8.1. Mascot

UCSC's mascot is the banana slug (specifically, Ariolimax dolichophallus), In 1975 the UCSC club soccer team chose the mascot the "Banana Slugs". UCSC had no formal team sports (and no fraternities) at the time, therefore they had no mascot. Three team members, Larry DeGhetaldi, Fred Bicknell, Sven Steinmo and their roommate, Richard Hedges, chose to name the team the Banana Slugs before an All Cal tournament. They felt that UCSC should have a mascot too. The team's unusual name was noted by the San Jose Mercury News after the team suffered an humiliating defeat against the San Jose State Spartans. Several years later, when the "club" basketball team became more formalized (with a coach and expanded schedule), the athletic director at the time, Terry Warner, informed the team that they needed to have a mascot and that it had been chosen to be the Sea Lions. The team summarily rejected that name, claiming to not need any mascot. As such, their uniforms simply said "UCSC" on them. In 1981, when the university began more formally participating in NCAA intercollegiate sports, the then-chancellor and some student athletes declared the mascot to be the "sea lions." Most students disliked the new mascot and offered an alternative mascot, the banana slug. In 1986, students voted via referendum to declare the banana slug the official mascot of UCSC – a vote the chancellor refused to honor, arguing that only athletes should choose the mascot. When a poll of athletes showed that they, too, wanted to be "Slugs", the chancellor relented.

The June 16, 1986, issue of People magazine featured a full-page spread dedicated to the selection of the Banana Slug as the official mascot of UCSC. In February 2008, ESPN Sports Travel named the UCSC Banana Slug as one of the ten best nicknames in college basketball.

The "Fiat Slug" logo prominently featured on campus is a trademark of UCSC owned by the Regents. It was developed by two students during the mascot controversy, who later incorporated as "Oxford West" and licensed their design from the Regents to produce clothing inspired by the university. The slug also is featured along with the school's logo on Vincent Vega's T-shirt in the 1994 film Pulp Fiction.

A sea lion statue can still be seen in front of the Thimann Hall lecture building.

9. See also

List of University of California, Santa Cruz people

Shakespeare Santa Cruz

University of California, Santa Cruz, Arboretum

10. Notes and references

11. External links

: a student-written analysis of the LRDP agreement published by the City on the Hill Press

, written by Elizabeth Spedding Calciano and Ray Collett, 1973