The Venice Film Festival or Venice International Film Festival (, "International Exhibition of Cinematographic Art of the Venice Biennale"), founded in 1932, is the oldest international film festival in the world. The film festival is part of the Venice Biennale which was founded by the Venetian City Council in 1895. The Biennale consists (now) of a range of separate events including (the International Art Exhibition (Venice); the International Festival of Contemporary Music (Venice); the International Theatre Festival (Venice), the International Architecture Exhibition (Venice), the International Festival of Contemporary Dance (Venice), and the International Kids’ Carnival (Venice) of which the Venice Film festival is probably the best known event.

The film festival has since taken place in late August or early September on the island of the Lido, Venice, Italy. Screenings take place in the historic Palazzo del Cinema on the Lungomare Marconi and in other venues nearby. Since its inception the Film Festival has become probably the most prestigious international film event and competition in the world. The 71st Festival took place from 27 August to 6 September 2014.

1. Awards

The Film Festival's current awards are:

1.1. Official selection - In competition

1.1.1. Golden Lion (Leone d'Oro)

Awarded to the best film screened in competition at the festival

1.1.2. Silver Lion Leone d'Argento

The Silver Lion is awarded to the best director in the competitive section Venezia (plus the number of the edition).

1.1.3. Grand Jury Prize

1.1.4. Volpi Cup (Coppa Volpi)

The Volpi Cups are awarded to:

'Best actor'

'Best actress' Formal awards for best actor and best actress have been given since 1934. In the mid-1990s awards were also given to supporting actors and actresses.

1.1.5. Marcello Mastroianni Award

The "Marcello Mastroianni Award" was instituted in 1998 in honor of the great Italian actor Marcello Mastroianni who died in 1996. The award was created to acknowledge an emerging actor or actress, and can be compared to the "Volpi Cup", the award for Best Actor and Best Actress.

1.1.6. 'Special Lion'

The Jury may also choose to award a 'Special Lion' for an overall work to a director or actor of a film presented in the main competition section.

1.1.7. Orizzonti section (Horizons)

is open to all "custom-format" works, with a wider view towards new trends in the expressive languages that converge in film. The awards of the Orizzonti section are:

The Orizzonti Prize

The Special Orizzonti Jury Prize (for feature-length films)

The Orizzonti Short Film Prize

The Orizzonti Medium-length Film Prize

1.1.8. Controcampo Italiano section

presents a panorama on Italian cinema with 7 narrative feature-length films, 7 short films, and 7 documentaries, all world premiere screenings and all in competition in their respective categories. The awards of this section are:

Controcampo Award (for narrative feature-length films)

Controcampo Award (for short films)

Controcampo Doc Award (for documentaries)

1.1.9. Best Screenplay Award

for best screenplay.

1.1.10. Lion of the Future

Award for a debut film.

1.1.11. Special Jury Prize

A Special Jury Prize is awarded to one or two films in most years.

1.1.12. Golden Osella

There are two Golden Osella Prizes: for Best Technical Contribution (to cinematographers, composers, etc.) and for Best Screenplay.

1.1.13. Jaeger-LeCoultre Glory to the Filmmaker Award

The “Jaeger-LeCoultre Glory to the Filmmaker” award was created by the Venice Film Festival and organized in collaboration with Jaeger-LeCoultre. It is dedicated to personalities that have made a significant contribution to contemporary cinema.

2. Past awards

2.1. Coppa Mussolini (Mussolini Cups)

The Mussolini Cups were the top awards from 1934 to 1942 for best Italian and best foreign film. Named after Italy's then dictator prime minister, Benito Mussolini, they were abandoned upon his ousting in 1943.

2.1.1. Coppa Mussolini (Mussolini Cup) for Best Italian Film

2.1.2. Mussolini Cup for Best Foreign Film

2.2. Great Gold Medals of the National Fascist Association for Entertainment

"Le Grandi Medaglie d’Oro dell’Associazione Nazionale Fascista dello Spettacolo" in Italian.

This was awarded to Best Actor and Best Actress. It was later replaced by the Volpi Cup for actors and actresses. The first time this prize was awarded to Katharine Hepburn for her role in Little Women by George Cukor

2.3. Audience Referendum

In the first edition of the festival in 1932, due to the lack of a jury and the awarding of official prizes, a list of acknowledgements was decided by popular vote, an tally determined by the number of people flocking to the films, and announced by the Organizing Committee. From this the Best Director was declared – Russian Nikolaj Ekk for the film The Road to Life, while the film by René Clair Give Us Liberty was voted Best Film.

2.4. Award for Best Director

3. See also

Venice Biennale

Rome Film Festival

Festival del film Locarno

4. References

5. External links

at La Biennale di Venezia website