The term "Western canon" denotes a body of books and, more broadly, music and art that have been traditionally accepted by Western scholars as the most important and influential in shaping Western culture. As such, it includes the "greatest works of artistic merit". Such a canon is important to the theory of educational perennialism and the development of "high culture". The idea of a Canon has been used to address the question What is Art?; according to this approach, a work is art by comparison to the works in the canon, or conversely, any aesthetic law to be valid should not rule out any of the works included in the canon. The concept has become challenged by advocates of multiculturalism and critics who charge that it has been influenced by race, gender, and other biases.

1. Origins

The process of listmaking舒defining the boundaries of the canon舒is endless. The philosopher John Searle has said, "In my experience there never was, in fact, a fixed 'canon'; there was rather a certain set of tentative judgments about what had importance and quality. Such judgments are always subject to revision, and in fact they were constantly being revised."

One of the notable attempts at compiling an authoritative canon in the English-speaking world was the Great Books of the Western World program. This program, developed in the middle third of the 20th century, grew out of the curriculum at the University of Chicago. University president Robert Maynard Hutchins and his collaborator Mortimer Adler developed a program that offered reading lists, books, and organizational strategies for reading clubs to the general public.

An earlier attempt, the Harvard Classics (1909), was promulgated by Harvard University president Charles W. Eliot, whose thesis was the same as Carlyle's:

2. Debate

There has been an ongoing debate, motivated by politics and social agendas, over the nature and status of the canon since at least the 1960s, much of which is rooted in critical theory, feminism, critical race theory, and Marxist attacks against capitalism and classical liberal principles. In the United States, in particular, the canon has been attacked as a compendium of books written mainly by "dead European men", that does not represent the viewpoints of many in contemporary societies around the world. Allan Bloom in his 1987 book The Closing of the American Mind, has disagreed strongly. Yale University Professor of Humanities Harold Bloom (no relation to Allan) has also argued strongly in favor of the canon, and in general the canon remains as a represented idea in many institutions, though its implications continue to be debated.

Defenders maintain that those who undermine the canon do so out of primarily political interests, and that such criticisms are misguided and/or disingenuous. As John Searle has written:

One of the main objections to a canon of literature is the question of authority舒who should have the power to determine what works are worth reading and teaching? Searle's rebuttal suggests that "one obvious difficulty with it [i.e., arguments against hierarchical ranking of books] is that if it were valid, it would argue against any set of required readings whatever; indeed, any list you care to make about anything automatically creates two categories, those that are on the list and those that are not."

3. Works

Works which are commonly included in the canon include works of fiction such as some epic poems, poetry, music, drama, novels, and other assorted forms of literature from the many diverse Western (and more recently non-Western) cultures. Many non-fiction works are also listed, primarily from the areas of religion, mythology, science, philosophy, psychology, economics, politics, and history.

Works which directly address the canon (both for and against):

Debating the Canon: A Reader from Addison to Nafisi by Lee Morrissey (ISBN 978-1403968203)

The History of Western Literature by Otto Maria Carpeaux (eight volumes, only available in Portuguese)

The Oldest Dead White European Males and Other Reflections on the Classics by Bernard Knox (ISBN 9780393312331.

Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human by Harold Bloom (ISBN 978-1573227513)

The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages by Harold Bloom (ISBN 978-1573225144) Other:

"The Dictionary of Cultural Literacy" by E.D. Hirsch

4. Examples

Examples of shorter canonical lists of most important works include the following:

The Big Read by the BBC, and its spin-offs in Bulgaria, Germany, and Hungary

Bibliothèque de la Pléiade

Directed Studies at Yale University curriculum

Great Books

Great Books of the Western World

The Harvard Classics

Le Monde's 100 Books of the Century – books of the 20th century

Modern Library 100 Best Novels – English-language novels of the 20th century

ZEIT-Bibliothek der 100 Bücher German Die Zeit list of 100 books

Library of America University reading lists reflect the Western canon:

Fordham University's Honors Program Curriculum

Brigham Young University's Honors Program's Great Works List

Colgate University's required Western Traditions class

University of Chicago Core Curriculum

Columbia College Core Curriculum

Concordia University's Liberal Arts College

Dartmouth College's Dialogues With the Classics program

Hillsdale College's Great Books and Western Heritage classes

New York University's mandatory Texts and Ideas course

Oglethorpe University's mandatory Core Curriculum sequence

Princeton University's Interdisciplinary Approaches to Western Culture

St. John's College Great Books reading list (established by Scott Buchanan and Stringfellow Barr)

Saint Mary's College of California Collegiate Seminar

Stanford University's Program in Structured Liberal Education curriculum

University of Notre Dame's Program of Liberal Studies curriculum

Boston College's Perspectives Program and Honors Program

Reed College's Humanities 110

Trinity Western University's Great Books Reading List Longer, more comprehensive, lists include the following:

Everyman's Library (Modern works)

The Modern Library

Penguin Classics

Oxford World's Classics

1001 Books You Must Read Before You Die Chronological brackets:

Philosopher John Searle suggests that the Western canon can be roughly defined as "a certain Western intellectual tradition that goes from, say, Socrates to Wittgenstein in philosophy, and from Homer to James Joyce in literature..."

5. See also

Canons of Elizabethan poetry

Easton Press – Books That Changed the World series

Franklin Library – Great Books of the Western World and Oxford Library of the World's Great Books series

Great Conversation

Classic book

World literature

Liberal arts

List of books banned by governments

6. Notes and references

7. External links

at

- a site documenting lists of "great books," classics, canons