Woodworking is the process of making items from wood.

1. History

Along with stone, mud and animal parts, wood was one of the first materials worked by early humans. Microwear analysis of the Mousterian stone tools used by the Neanderthals show that many were used to work wood. The development of civilization was closely tied to the development of increasingly greater degrees of skill in working these materials.

Among early finds of wooden tools are the worked sticks from Kalambo Falls, Clacton-on-Sea and Lehringen. The spears from Schöningen (Germany) provide some of the first examples of wooden hunting gear. Flint tools were used for carving. Since Neolithic times, carved wooden vessels are known, for example, from the Linear Pottery culture wells at Kückhofen and Eythra.

Examples of Bronze Age wood-carving include tree trunks worked into coffins from northern Germany and Denmark and wooden folding-chairs. The site of Fellbach-Schmieden in Germany has provided fine examples of wooden animal statues from the Iron Age. Wooden idols from the La Tène period are known from a sanctuary at the source of the Seine in France.

The ancient civilization that first used woodworking was the Egyptians. Woodworking is depicted in many ancient Egyptian drawings, and a considerable amount of ancient Egyptian furniture (such as stools, chairs, tables, beds, chests) has been preserved in tombs. As well, the inner coffins found in the tombs were also made of wood. The metal used by the Egyptians for woodworking tools was originally copper and eventually, after 2000 BC bronze as ironworking was unknown until much later.

Commonly used woodworking tools included axes, adzes, chisels, pull saws, and bow drills. Mortise and tenon joints are attested from the earliest Predynastic period. These joints were strengthened using pegs, dowels and leather or cord lashings. Animal glue came to be used only in the New Kingdom period. Ancient Egyptians invented the art of veneering and used varnishes for finishing, though the composition of these varnishes is unknown. Although different native acacias were used, as was the wood from the local sycamore and tamarisk trees, deforestation in the Nile valley resulted in the need for the importation of wood, notably cedar, but also Aleppo pine, boxwood and oak, starting from the Second Dynasty.

The progenitors of Chinese woodworking are considered to be Lu Ban (魯班) and his wife Lady Yun, from the Spring and Autumn Period. Lu Ban is said to have introduced the plane, chalk-line, and other tools to China. His teachings were supposedly left behind in the book Lu Ban Jing (魯班經, "Manuscript of Lu Ban"). Despite this, it is believed that the text was written some 1500 years after his death. This book is filled largely with descriptions of dimensions for use in building various items such as flower pots, tables, altars, etc., and also contains extensive instructions concerning Feng Shui. It mentions almost nothing of the intricate glue-less and nail-less joinery for which Chinese furniture was so famous.

2. Materials

Historically, woodworkers relied upon the woods native to their region, until transportation and trade innovations made more exotic woods available to the craftsman. Woods are typically sorted into three basic types: hardwoods typified by tight grain and derived from broadleaf trees, softwoods from coniferous trees, and man-made materials such as plywood and MDF.

Typically furniture such as tables and chairs is made using solid stock, and cabinet/fixture makers employ the use of plywood and other man made panel products.

3. Notable woodworkers

Alvar Aalto

Norm Abram

John Boson

Henning Engelsen

Wharton Esherick

Tage Frid

Greta Hopkinson

James Krenov

Mark Lindquist

Sal Maccarone

Thomas J. MacDonald

John Makepeace

Sam Maloof

David J. Marks

George Nakashima

Nick Offerman

Jere Osgood

Alan Peters

Matthias Pliessnig

André Jacob Roubo

Paul Sellers

Evert Sodergren

Henry O. Studley

Roy Underhill

Alexander Grabovetskiy

4. See also

Boat building

Cabinet making

Carpentry

Ébéniste

Fire hardening

Glossary of woodworking terms

History of construction

History of wood carving

Japanese carpentry

Lath art

Luthier

millwork

Marionette

Saw pit

Segmented turning

Sloyd, a system of handicraft-based education

Stave church

Studio Furniture

Tack cloth

Timber framing

Turning

Wood as a medium

Wood carving

Wood glue

Woodturning

Woodworking workbench

5. Notes

6. References

6.1. Further reading

Naylor, Andrew. . BioRes, April 2013

7. External links

about the Zafimaniry peoples in Madagascar.