Kislev (Hebrew: כִּסְלֵו, Standard) Kislev Tiberian ; also Chislev is the third month of the civil year and the ninth month of the ecclesiastical year on the Hebrew calendar.

In a regular (kesidran) year Kislev has 30 days, but because of the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, in some years it can lose a day to make the year a "short" (chaser) year. Kislev is an autumn month which occurs in November–December on the Gregorian calendar and is sometimes known as the month of dreams. The name of the month may be taken from Akkadian kislimu, which means "inspissated, thickened" due to plentiful rains. But the name may also derive from the Hebrew root K-S-L as in the words "kesel, kisla" (hope, positiveness) or "ksil" (Orion, a constellation that shines especially in this month) - because of the expectation and hope for rains.

1. Holidays in Kislev

25 Kislev—2 Tevet - Hanukkah – ends 3 Tevet if Kislev is short

2. Kislev in Jewish history

15 Kislev - (162 BC) - The Greeks set up the "Abomination of Desolation" in the Temple

"Now the fifteenth day of the month Kislev, in the hundred forty and fifth year, they set up the abomination of desolation upon the altar, and builded idol altars throughout the cities of Judah on every side." (1 Maccabees 1:54) 20 Kislev - (457 BC) - Ezra's address

Ezra, head of the Sanhedrin and the leader of the Jewish people at the time of the building of the Second Temple, made an address to a three-day assemblage of Jews in Jerusalem, telling them to adhere to the teachings of the Torah and to dissolve their interfaith marriages (this was from assimilation due to their 70-year exile in Babylonia). 25 Kislev - (167 BC) The Greeks make pagan sacrifices in the Temple

"Now the five and twentieth day of the month they did sacrifice upon the idol altar, which was upon the altar of God." (1 Maccabees 1:59) 25 Kislev - (164 BC) - The Hanukkah miracle
27 Kislev - (2105 BC) - Flood rains cease

It is said that the forty days and nights of rainfall which covered the face of earth with water in Noah's time ended on Kislev 27 of the Hebrew year 1656 (2105 BCE). The flood itself lasted a full year (According to Genesis 6-8).

3. References In fiction

In the story of Xenogears, Kislev is the name of a country, named after the Hebrew month.

In the Warhammer universe, Kislev is both the name for a city near the chaos wastes and the country in which it resides.

In the Dragonlance universe, Kislev (or Chislev) represents the godly force of instinct.

By Jon Stewart in "Can I Interest You in Hannukah" off of Stephen Colbert's "A Colbert Christmas: The Greatest Gift of All!"

4. References

5. External links