The superorder Xenarthra is a group of placental mammals (infraclass Eutheria), extant today only in the Americas and represented by anteaters, tree sloths, and armadillos. The origins of the order can be traced as far back as the Paleocene, as early as 59 million years ago in South America. Xenarthrans developed and diversified extensively in South America during its long period of isolation. They invaded the Antilles by the early Miocene and, starting about 9 Mya, they spread to Central and North America as part of the Great American Interchange. Nearly all of the formerly abundant megafaunal xenarthrans, such as ground sloths, glyptodonts, and pampatheres, became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene.

Xenarthrans share several characteristics not present in other placental mammals. The name Xenarthra, which means "strange joints", was chosen because their vertebral joints have extra articulations and are unlike those of any other mammals — a character referred to as "xenarthry" — and ischiosacral fusion. The males have internal testicles, which are located between the bladder and the rectum. Also, xenarthrans have the lowest metabolic rates among the therians.

1. Evolutionary relationships

Xenarthrans were previously classified alongside the pangolins and aardvarks in the order Edentata (meaning toothless, because the members do not have front incisor teeth and lack, or have poorly developed, molars). Subsequently, Edentata was found to be a polyphyletic grouping whose New World and Old World taxa are unrelated, and it was split up to reflect their true phylogeny. Aardvarks and pangolins are now placed in individual orders, and the new order Xenarthra was erected to group the remaining families (which are all related). The name Xenarthra means "strange joints", and was chosen because their vertebral joints have extra articulations and are unlike those of any other mammals. Because they lack characteristics believed to be present in the common ancestor of other known eutherian mammals, some weak morphological evidence suggests Xenarthra is outside Epitheria, the group that contains all other eutherians known today. Some even place xenarthrans outside of placentals, in the separate group Paratheria.

The morphology of xenarthrans generally suggests the anteaters and sloths are more closely related to each other than either is to the armadillos; this is upheld by molecular studies. Since its conception, Xenarthra has increasingly come to be considered to be of a higher rank than 'order'; some authorities consider it to be a cohort, while others consider it to be a superorder. Whatever the rank, Xenarthra is now generally considered to be divided into two orders: Cingulata, which contains the armadillos; and Pilosa, which contains the Vermilingua (anteaters) and Folivora (sloths; previously known as Tardigrada or Phyllophaga).

Xenarthra may be most closely related to either Afrotheria (in the group Atlantogenata), or Epitheria (comprising Afrotheria and Boreoeutheria). In other words, it may be nested within Eutheria or it may be the basal extant group. A comprehensive phylogeny by Goloboff et al. includes xenarthrans as a sister clade of Euarchontoglires within Boreoeutheria (Laurasiatheria+Euarchontoglires).

2. Classification

XENARTHRA

Order Cingulata

Family Dasypodidae: armadillos

Pink fairy armadillo, Chlamyphorus truncatus

Northern naked-tailed armadillo, Cabassous centralis

Chacoan naked-tailed armadillo, Cabassous chacoensis

Southern naked-tailed armadillo, Cabassous unicinctus

Greater naked-tailed armadillo, Cabassous tatouay

Screaming hairy armadillo, Chaetophractus vellerosus

Big hairy armadillo, Chaetophractus villosus

Andean hairy armadillo, Chaetophractus nationi

Nine-banded armadillo or long-nosed armadillo, Dasypus novemcinctus

Seven-banded armadillo, Dasypus septemcinctus

Southern long-nosed armadillo, Dasypus hybridus

Llanos long-nosed armadillo, Dasypus sabanicola

Great long-nosed armadillo, Dasypus kappleri

Hairy long-nosed armadillo, Dasypus pilosus

Six-banded armadillo or yellow armadillo, Euphractus sexcinctus

Giant armadillo, Priodontes maximus

Southern three-banded armadillo, Tolypeutes matacus

Brazilian three-banded armadillo, Tolypeutes tricinctus

Pichi or dwarf armadillo, Zaedyus pichiy

Family †Glyptodontidae: glyptodonts

Family †Pampatheriidae: pampatheres

Order Pilosa

Suborder Folivora : sloths

Family Bradypodidae: three-toed sloths

Pygmy three-toed sloth, Bradypus pygmaeus

Brown-throated three-toed sloth, Bradypus variegatus

Pale-throated three-toed sloth, Bradypus tridactylus

Maned three-toed sloth, Bradypus torquatus

Family Megalonychidae: two-toed sloths and extinct megalonychid ground sloths

Hoffman's two-toed sloth, Choloepus hoffmanni

Linnaeus's two-toed sloth or southern two-toed sloth, Choloepus didactylus

Family †Megatheriidae: megatheriid ground sloths

Family †Mylodontidae: mylodontid ground sloths

Family †Nothrotheriidae: nothrotheriid ground sloths and aquatic sloths

Suborder Vermilingua : anteaters

Family Cyclopedidae: silky anteaters

Silky anteater, Cyclopes didactylus

Family Myrmecophagidae: anteaters

Giant anteater, Myrmecophaga tridactyla

Northern tamandua, Tamandua mexicana

Southern tamandua, Tamandua tetradactyla

3. References

4. External links