As a means of recording the passage of time, the 12th century is the period from 1101 to 1200 in accordance with the Julian calendar in the Common Era. In the history of European culture, this period is considered part of the High Middle Ages and is sometimes called the Age of the Cistercians. In Song Dynasty China an invasion by Jurchens caused a political schism of north and south. The Khmer Empire of Cambodia flourished during this century, while the Fatimids of Egypt were overtaken by the Ayyubid dynasty.

1. Ongoing events

China is under the Northern Song Dynasty. Early in the century, Zhang Zeduan paints Along the River During the Qingming Festival. It will later end up in the Palace Museum, Beijing.

In southeast Asia, there is conflict between the Khmer Empire and the Champa. Angkor Wat is built under the Hindu king Suryavarman II. By the end of the century the Buddhist Jayavarman VII becomes the ruler.

Japan is in its Heian period. The Chōjū-jinbutsu-giga is made and attributed to Toba Sōjō. It ends up at the Kōzan-ji, Kyoto.

In Oceania, the Tuʻi Tonga Empire expands to a much greater area.

Europe undergoes the Renaissance of the 12th century. The blast furnace for the smelting of cast iron is imported from China, appearing around Lapphyttan, Sweden, as early as 1150.

Alexander Neckam is the first European to document the mariner's compass, first documented by Shen Kuo during the previous century.

Christian humanism becomes a self-conscious philosophical tendency in Europe. Christianity is also introduced to Estonia, Finland, and Karelia.

The first medieval universities are founded. Pierre Abelard teaches.

Middle English begins to develop, and literacy begins to spread outside the Church throughout Europe. In addition, churchmen are increasingly willing to take on secular roles. By the end of the century, at least a third of England's bishops also act as royal judges in secular matters.

The Ars antiqua period in the history of the classical music of Western Europe begins.

The earliest recorded miracle play is performed in Dunstable, England

Gothic architecture and trouvère music begin in France.

During the middle of the century, the Cappella Palatina is built in Palermo, Sicily, and the Madrid Skylitzes manuscript illustrates the Synopsis of Histories by John Skylitzes.

Fire and plague insurance first become available in Iceland, and the first documented outbreaks of influenza there happens.

The medieval state of Serbia state is formed by Stefan Nemanja and then continued by the Nemanjić dynasty.

By the end of the century, both the Capetian Dynasty and the House of Anjou are relying primarily on mercenaries in their militaries. Paid soldiers are available year-round, unlike knights who expected certain periods off to maintain their manor lifestyles.

In India, Hoysala architecture reaches a peak.

In the Middle East, the icon of Theotokos of Vladimir is painted probably in Constantinople. Everything but the faces will later be retouched, and the icon will go to the Tretyakov Gallery of Moscow.

The Georgian poet Shota Rustaveli composes his epic poem The Knight in the Panther's Skin.

Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi founds his "school of illumination".

In North Africa, the kasbah of Marrakesh is built, including the city gate Bab Agnaou and the Koutoubia mosque.

In sub-Saharan Africa, Kente cloth is first woven.

2. Inventions, discoveries and introductions by year

List of 12th-century inventions

1104—The Venice Arsenal of Venice, Italy, is founded. It employed some 16,000 people for the mass production of sailing ships in large assembly lines, hundreds of years before the Industrial Revolution.

1106—Finished building of Gelati.

1107—The Chinese engineer Wu Deren combines the mechanical compass vehicle of the south-pointing chariot with the distance-measuring odometer device.

1111—The Chinese Donglin Academy is founded.

1165—The Liuhe Pagoda of Hangzhou, China, is built.

1170—The Christian notion of Purgatory is born.

1185—First record of windmills.

3. Political events by year

1100: On August 5, Henry I is crowned King of England.

1100: On December 25, Baldwin of Boulogne is crowned as the first King of Jerusalem in the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem.

1101: In July, the Treaty of Alton is signed between Henry I of England and his older brother Robert, Duke of Normandy in which Robert agrees to recognize Henry as king of England in exchange for a yearly stipend and other concessions. The agreement temporarily ends a crisis in the succession of the Anglo-Norman kings.

1101–1103: David the Builder takes over Kakheti and Hereti, (now parts of Georgia).

1102: King Coloman unites Hungary and Croatia under the Hungarian Crown.

1103-1104: A church council is convened by King David the Builder in Urbnisi to reorganize the Georgian Orthodox Church.

1104: In the Battle of Ertcukhi, King David the Builder defeats an army of Seljuks.

1104: King Jayawarsa of Kadiri (on Java) ascends to the throne.

1107–1111: Sigurd I of Norway becomes the first Norwegian king to embark on a crusade to the Holy Land. He fights in Lisbon and on various Mediterranean isles, and helps the King of Jerusalem to take Sidon from the Muslims.

1108: By the Treaty of Devol, signed in September, Bohemond I of Antioch has to submit to the Byzantine Empire, becoming the vassal of Alexius I.

1109: On June 10, Bertrand of Toulouse captures the County of Tripoli (northern Lebanon/western Syria).

1109: In the Battle of Nakło, Boleslaus III Wrymouth defeats the Pomeranians and re-establishes Polish access to the sea.

1109: On August 24, in the Battle of Hundsfeld, Boleslaus III Wrymouth defeats Emperor Henry V of Germany and stops German expansion eastward.

1111: On April 14, during Henry V's first expedition to Rome, he is crowned Holy Roman Emperor.

1113: Paramavishnulok is crowned as King Suryavarman II in Cambodia. He expands the Khmer Empire and builds Angkor Wat during the first half of the century. He establishes diplomatic relations with China.

1115: The Georgian army occupies Rustavi in the war to free Georgia from the Muslims.

1115: King Kamesvara of Kadiri ascends to the throne. Janggala ceases to exist and comes under Kadiri domination, highly possible under royal marriage. During his reign Mpu Dharmaja writes Kakawin Smaradahana, a eulogy for the king which become the inspiration for the Panji cycle tales, which spread across Southeast Asia.

1116: The Byzantine army defeats the Turks at Philomelion.

c. 1119: The Knights Templar are founded to protect Christian pilgrims in Jerusalem.

1120: On January 16, the Council of Nablus, a council of ecclesiastic and secular lords in the crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, establishes the first written laws for the kingdom.

1120: On November 25, William Adelin, the only legitimate son of King Henry I of England, drowns in the White Ship Disaster, leading to a succession crisis which will bring down the Norman monarchy of England.

1121: On August 12, in the Battle of Didgori, the greatest military victory in Georgian history, King David the Builder with 40,000 Georgians, 15,000 Kipchak auxiliaries, 500 Alan mercenaries and 300 French Crusaders defeats a Seljuk-led Muslim coalition army of 400,000.

1121: On December 25, St. Norbert and 29 companions make their solemn vows in Premontre, France, establishing the Premonstratensian Order.

1122: The Battle of Beroia (Modern-day Stara Zagora, Bulgaria) results in the disappearance of the Pechenegs Turkish tribe as an independent force.

1122: On September 23, the Concordat of Worms (Pactum Calixtinum) is drawn up between Emperor Henry V and Pope Calixtus II bringing an end to the first phase of the power struggle between the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire.

1122: King David the Builder captures Tbilisi and declares it the capital city of Georgia, ending 400 years of Arab rule.

1123: The Jurchen dynasty of China forces Koryo (now Korea) to recognize their suzerainty.

1124: In April or May, David I is crowned King of the Scots.

1125: On June 11, in the Battle of Azaz, the Crusader states, led by King Baldwin II of Jerusalem, defeat the Seljuk Turks.

1125: In November, the Jurchens of the Jin Dynasty declare war on the Song Dynasty, beginning the Jin–Song wars.

1125: Lothair of Supplinburg, duke of Saxony, is elected Holy Roman Emperor instead of the nearest heir, Frederick of Swabia, beginning the great struggle of Guelf and Ghibelline.

1127: The Northern Song dynasty loses power over northern China to the Jurchens of Manchuria.

1128: On June 24, Portugal gains independence from the Kingdom of León at the Battle of São Mamede; (recognised by León in 1143).

1130–1180: 50-year drought in the American Southwest.

1130–1138: Papal schism, Pope Innocent II vs. Antipope Anacletus II.

1130: On March 26, Sigurd I of Norway dies. A golden era of 95 years comes to an end for Norway as civil wars between the members of Harald Fairhair's family line rage for the remainder of the century.

1130: On Christmas Day, Roger II is crowned King of Sicily, the royal title being bestowed on him by Antipope Anacletus II.

1130: King Jayabaya of Kadiri ascends to the throne.

1132: The Southern Song Dynasty establishes China's first permanent standing navy, although China had a long naval history prior. The main admiral's office is at the port of Dinghai.

1132–1183: the Chinese navy increases from a mere 3,000 marine soldiers to 52,000 marine soldiers stationed in 20 different squadrons. During this time, hundreds of treadmill-operated paddle wheel craft are assembled for the navy, in order to fight the Jurchen's Jin Dynasty in the north.

1135–1154: The Anarchy is a period of civil war in England.

1136: Suger begins rebuilding the abbey church at St Denis north of Paris, which is regarded as the first major Gothic building.

1137: On July 22, the future King Louis VII of France marries Eleanor, the Duchess of Aquitaine.

1138: On October 11, the 1138 Aleppo earthquake devastates much of northern Syria.

1139: in April, the Second Lateran Council ends the papal schism.

1139: On July 5, in the Treaty of Mignano, Pope Innocent II confirms Roger II as King of Sicily, Duke of Apulia, and Prince of Capua and invests him with his titles.

1139: On July 26, the Portuguese defeat the Almoravids led by Ali ibn Yusuf in the Battle of Ourique; Prince Afonso Henriques is acclaimed King of Portugal by his soldiers.

1140–1150: Collapse of the Ancestral Puebloan culture at Chaco Canyon (modern-day New Mexico).

1141: The Treaty of Shaoxing ends the conflict between the Jin Dynasty and Southern Song Dynasty, legally establishing the boundaries of the two countries and forcing the Song Dynasty to renounce all claims to its former territories north of the Huai River. The treaty reduces the Southern Song into a quasi-tributary state of the Jurchen Jin Dynasty.

1143: Afonso Henriques is proclaimed King of Portugal by the cortes.

1143: The Treaty of Zamora recognizes Portuguese independence from the Kingdom of León. Portugal also recognizes the suzerainty of the pope.

1144: On December 24, Edessa falls to the Atabeg Zengi.

1145–1148: The Second Crusade is launched in response to the fall of the County of Edessa.

1147: On October 25, the four-month long Siege of Lisbon successfully brings the city under definitive Portuguese control, expelling the Moorish overlords.

1147: A new Berber dynasty, the Almohads, led by Emir Abd al-Mu'min, takes North Africa from the Almoravides and soon invades the Iberian Peninsula. The Almohads began as a religious movement to rid Islam of impurities.

1147: The Wendish Crusade against the Polabian Slavs (or "Wends") in what is now northern and eastern Germany.

1150: Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Barcelona marries Petronilla, the Queen of Aragon.

1151: The Treaty of Tudilén (or Treaty of Tudején) is signed by Alfonso VII of León and Raymond Berengar IV, Count of Barcelona, recognising the Aragonese conquests south of the Júcar and the right to expand in and annex the Kingdom of Murcia.

1153: The Treaty of Wallingford (Treaty of Winchester, Treaty of Westminster), effectively ends the civil war between Empress Matilda and her cousin King Stephen of England fought over the English crown. Stephen acknowledges Matilda's son Henry of Anjou as his heir.

1153: The First Treaty of Constance is signed between Emperor Frederick I and Pope Eugene III, by the terms of which, the emperor is to prevent any action by Manuel I Comnenus to reestablish the Byzantine Empire on Italian soil and to assist the pope against his enemies in revolt in Rome.

1154: the Moroccan-born Muslim geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi publishes his Geography.

1154: On December 27, Henry II is crowned King of England at Westminster Abbey.

1155: Pope Adrian IV grants overlordship of Ireland to Henry II of England in the bull Laudabiliter.

1156: On June 18, the Treaty of Benevento is entered into by Pope Adrian IV and the Norman Kingdom of Sicily. After years of turbulent relations, the popes finally settles down to a peace with the Hauteville kings. The kingship of William I is recognised over all Sicily, Apulia, Calabria, Campania, and Capua. The tribute to the pope of 600 schifati agreed upon by Roger II in 1139 at Mignano is affirmed and another 400 schifati is added for the new lands.

1158: The Treaty of Sahagún ends war between Castile and León.

1161: the Song Dynasty Chinese navy, employing gunpowder bombs launched from trebuchets, defeats the enormous Jin Dynasty navy in the East China Sea in the Battle of Tangdao and on the Yangtze River in the Battle of Caishi.

1161: Kilij Arslan II, Sultan of Rum, makes peace with the Byzantine Empire, recognizing the emperor's primacy.

1161: In the siege of Ani, Georgian troops take over control of city, only to have it sold for the second time to the Shaddadids, a Kurdish dynasty.

1162: Genghis Khan, the founder of the Mongol Empire, is born as Temüjin.

1163: The Norwegian Law of Succession takes effect.

1168: King Valdemar I of Denmark conquers Arkona on the Island of Rügen, the strongest pagan fortress and temple in northern Europe.

1169: On May 1, the Norman invasion of Ireland begins. Richard fitzGilbert de Clare ('Strongbow') makes an alliance with the exiled Irish chief, Dermot MacMurrough, to help him recover his kingdom of Leinster.

1170: The Treaty of Sahagún is signed by Alfonso VIII of Castile and Alfonso II of Aragon. Based on the terms of the accord, Alfonso VIII agrees to give Alfonso II three hostages, to be used as tribute payments owed by Ibn Mardanīš of Valencia and Murcia.

1170: On December 29, Thomas Becket is murdered in Canterbury Cathedral.

1171: Saladin deposes the last Fatimid Caliph Al-'Āḍid, initiating the Ayyubid dynasty.

1171: On November 11, Henry II of England lands in Ireland to assert his claim as Lord of Ireland.

1174: On July 12, William I of Scotland is captured by the English in the Battle of Alnwick. He accepts the feudal overlordship of the English crown and pays ceremonial allegiance at York.

1175: Hōnen Shōnin (Genkū) founds the Jōdo shū (Pure Land) sect of Buddhism.

1175: The Treaty of Windsor is signed by King Henry II of England and the High King of Ireland, Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair.

1176: On May 29, Frederick Barbarossa's forces are defeated in the Battle of Legnano by the Lombard League which results in the emperor's acknowledgement of the pope's sovereignty over the Papal States and Alexander acknowledging the emperor's overlordship of the imperial Church.

1176: On September 17, The Battle of Myriokephalon (Myriocephalum; Turkish: Miryakefalon Savaşı) is fought between the Byzantine Empire and the Seljuk Turks in Phrygia. It is a serious reversal for the Byzantine forces and will be the final, unsuccessful, effort by the Byzantines to recover the interior of Anatolia from the Seljuk Turks.

1177: The Treaty or Peace of Venice is signed by the Papacy and its allies, and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor. The Norman Kingdom of Sicily also takes part in negotiations and the treaty thereby determines the political course of all Italy for the next several years.

1178: Chinese writer Zhou Qufei, a Guangzhou customs officer, writes of an island far west in the Indian Ocean (possibly Madagascar), from where people with skin "as black as lacquer" and with frizzy hair were captured and purchased as slaves by Arab merchants.

1179: The Treaty of Cazola (Cazorla) is signed by Alfonso II of Aragon and Alfonso VIII of Castile, dividing Andalusia into separate zones of conquest for the two kingdoms, so that the work of the Reconquista would not be stymied by internecine feuding.

1180–1185: the Genpei War in Japan.

1182: revolt of the people of Constantinople against the Latins, whom they massacre, proclaiming Andronicus I Comnenus co-emperor.

1183: On January 25, the final Peace of Constance between Frederick Barbarossa, the pope, and the Lombard towns is signed, confirming the Peace of Venice of 1177.

1183: On September 24, Andronicus I Comnenus has his nephew Alexius II Comnenus strangled.

1184: On March 24, Queen Tamar, King of Georgia, accedes to the throne as sole ruler after reigning with her father, George III, for six years.

1185: The Uprising of Asen and Peter against the Byzantine Empire leads to the restoration of the Bulgarian Empire.

1185: Andronicus I Comnenus is deposed and, on September 12, executed as a result of the Norman massacre of the Greeks of Thessalonika.

1185: The cathedral school (Katedralskolan) in Lund, Sweden, is founded. The school is the oldest in northern Europe, and one of the oldest in all of Europe.

1185: Beginning in this year the Kamakura shogunate deprives the emperor of Japan of political power.

1186: On January 27, the future Holy Roman Emperor Henry VI marries Constance of Sicily, the heiress to the Sicilian throne.

1187: On July 4, in the Battle of Hattin, Saladin defeats the king of Jerusalem.

1187: In August, the Swedish royal and commercial center Sigtuna is attacked by Baltic-Finnish raiders from Couronia and Estonia.

1189: On September 3, Richard I is crowned King of England at Westminster.

1189–1192: The Third Crusade is an attempt by European leaders to wrest the Holy Land from Saladin.

1190: On June 10, Emperor Frederick Barbarossa drowns in the River Salef, leaving the Crusader army under the command of the rivals Philip II of France and Richard I of England, which ultimately leads to the dissolution of the army.

1191: On September 7, Saladin is defeated by Richard I of England at the Battle of Arsuf.

1192: In April, Conrad of Montferrat is elected King of Jerusalem as Conrad I, then assassinated a few days later (April 28), before the coronation, by two Hashshashin.

1192: In the Battle of Jaffa, King Richard the Lionheart defeats Saladin.

1192: In June, the Treaty of Ramla is signed by Saladin and Richard Lionheart. Under the terms of the agreement, Jerusalem will remain under Muslim control. However, the city will be open to Christian pilgrims. The Latin Kingdom is reduced to a coastal strip that extends from Tyre to Jaffa.

1192: Minamoto Yoritomo is appointed Sei-i Taishōgun, "barbarian-subduing great general, shōgun for short, the first military dictator to bear this title.

1193: Nalanda, the great Indian Buddhist educational centre, is destroyed.

1193: Sultan Shahābuddin Muhammad Ghori, establishes the first Muslim empire in India by defeating Prithviraj Chauhan

1193: the first known merchant guild is established.

1195: On June 16, the struggle of Shamqori. Georgian forces annihilate the army of Abu Baqar.

1198: The brethren of the Crusader hospital in Acre are raised to a military order of knights, the Teutonic Knights, formally known as the Order of the Knights of the Hospital of St. Mary of the Teutons in Jerusalem.

1199: Pope Innocent III writes to Kaloyan, inviting him to unite the Bulgarian Church with the Roman Catholic Church.

4. Significant people

Adrian IV, pope

Aelred, Saint, English monk and spiritual writer

Afonso Henriques, first king of Portugal

Alan IV, Duke of Brittany

Albert of Jerusalem, Saint, Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem

Albert of Louvain, Saint, Bishop of Liège

Allama Prabhu, Indian Mystic and an important Vachana Poet.

Alexander I of Scotland, king

Alexius I Comnenus, emperor

Alexius II Comnenus, emperor

Alexius III Angelus, emperor

Alfonso II of Aragon, king

Alfonso VI of Castile, king

Alfonso VII of Castile, king

Alfonso VIII of Castile, king

Amadeus of Lausanne, Blessed, Bishop of Lausanne

Andrei I Bogolyubsky, Prince of Suzdal

Andronicus I Comnenus, emperor

Anselm, Saint, Abbot of Bec and Archbishop of Canterbury

Anthelm, Saint, Abbot of the Grand Chartreuse

Arthur I, Duke of Brittany

Averroes Ibn Rushd, Spanish Islamic polymath

Baldwin IV of Jerusalem, king

Béla II of Hungary

Béla III of Hungary

Bernard, Saint, Abbot of Clairvaux, preacher and reformer

Bertha, Duchess of Brittany

Berthold, Saint, found of the Carmelite Order

Bhaskara II, Indian mathematician and astronomer

Bohemund I of Antioch, prince

Boleslaus III Wrymouth, king of Poland

Boleslav IV the Curly, high duke of Poland

Bruno of Segni, Saint, bishop

Calixtus II, pope

Canute V of Denmark, king

Canute VI of Denmark, king

Chakhrukhadze, Georgian poet

Christina of Markyate, Prioress of St. Albans Abbey

Coloman I, King of Hungary

Conan IV, Duke of Brittany, the Younger

Conrad I of Montferrat, King elect of Jerusalem

Constance, Duchess of Brittany

David I of Scotland, king

David the Builder, King of Georgia

David V of Georgia

David Soslani, husband of Queen Tamar

Demetre I, king of Georgia

Dominic de Guzmán, Saint, founder of the Order of Preachers

Edgar of Scotland, king

Edmund of Abingdon, Saint, theologian, Archbishop of Canterbury

Eleanor of Aquitaine, queen consort of France and later of the Kingdom of England

Emeric I of Hungary, king

Engelbert II of Berg, Saint, Archbishop of Cologne

Eric I of Denmark, king

Eric II of Denmark, king

Eric III of Denmark, king

Eric IX of Sweden, Saint, king

Erik Gnupsson, Bishop of Greenland

Eugene III, Blessed, pope

Eustathios of Thessalonike, Saint, archbishop of Thessaloniki and writer

Eystein I of Norway, king

Eystein II of Norway, king

Eysteinn Erlendsson, Saint, Bishop of Nidaros

Felix of Valois, Saint, co-founder of the Order of the Holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives

Francis of Assisi, Saint, founder of the Order of Friars Minor

Frederick Barbarossa, Holy Roman Emperor

Galdino della Sala, Saint, Archbishop of Milan

Gelasius II, pope

Genghis Khan, Great Khan of the Mongol Empire

Geoffrey II, Duke of Brittany

Geoffrey V, Count of Anjou and Duke of Normandy

George III, king of Georgia

Geza II, king of Hungary

Gilbert of Sempringham, Saint, founder of the Gilbertines.

Haakon II of Norway the Broad-shouldered, king

Harald IV Gille of Norway, king

Henry (Bishop of Uppsala), Saint

Henry, Count of Portugal

Henry I of England, king and Duke of Normandy

Henry II of England, king and Duke of Normandy

Henry IV of Germany, king and emperor

Henry V of Germany, king and emperor

Henry VI of Germany, king and emperor

Hildegard of Bingen, Saint, polymath and first Western musical composer known by name

Hōnen Shōnin (Genkū), religious founder

Honorius II, pope

Huemac, last Emperor of the Toltecs, 1090-1170

Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy

Hugh III, Duke of Burgundy

Hugh of Grenoble, Saint, bishop

Hugh of Lincoln, Saint, bishop

Huizong, Emperor of China

Humbert III, Count of Savoy, Blessed

Hunac Ceel Claimed ruler of The League of Mayapan

Ida of Boulogne, Saint, countess

Inge I of Norway Hunchback, king

Innocent II, pope

Innocent III, pope

Isaac II Angelus, emperor

Ivan Asen I of Bulgaria, emperor

Ivo of Chartres, Saint, bishop

Jayavarman VII, Khmer emperor

John II Comnenos, emperor

John of England, king and Duke of Normandy

John of Matha, Saint, co-founder of the Order of the Holy Trinity for the Redemption of Captives

Kaloyan of Bulgaria, emperor

Lawrence O'Toole, Saint, Archbishop of Dublin

Leopold III, Margrave of Austria, Saint

Lin Tinggui, Chinese painter of Buddhist themes

Louis VI of France, king

Louis VII of France, king

Lucius II, pope

Magnus Erlendsson, Earl of Orkney, Saint

Magnus III of Norway, king

Magnus IV of Norway the Blind, king

Magnus V of Norway, king

Maimonides, Jewish philosopher

Malachy O'More, Saint, Archbishop of Armagh

Malcolm IV of Scotland, king

Manuel I Comnenus, emperor

Matilda of Tuscany, countess

Mechtildis, Saint, abbess

Minamoto no Yoritomo, shōgun of Japan, founder of the Kamakura shogunate

Muhammad of Ghor, Afghan ruler

Nerses of Lambron, Saint, Archbishop of Tarsus, theologian

Niels of Denmark, king

Norbert of Xanten, Saint, founder of the Premonstratensian Order of canons regular, Archbishop of Magdeburg

Odo I, Duke of Burgundy

Odo II, Duke of Burgundy

Odo III, Duke of Burgundy

Odo of Cambrai, Saint, bishop, theologian

Olaf Magnusson of Norway, king

Olegarius, Saint, Archbishop of Tarragona

Omar Khayyám, Persian poet and astronomer

Opizars, Beshqen and Beqa, celebrated Georgian gold-smiths.

Otto of Bamberg, Saint, bishop, chancellor of the Holy Roman Empire

Paschal II, pope

Peter Abelard, philosopher

Peter Nolasco, Saint, co-founder of the Order of Our Lady of Ransom

Peter, Bishop of Poitiers, Saint

Peter IV of Bulgaria, emperor

Philip I of France, king

Philip II of France, Augustus, king

Prithviraj Chauhan, king of Ajmer in India

Raymond of Fitero, Saint, founder of the Order of Calatrava

Raymond of Peñafort, Saint, canon lawyer

Richard I of England, king and Duke of Normandy

Richard of Chichester, Saint, bishop

Richard of St. Victor, theologian

Robert Curthose, Duke of Normandy

Robert de Bethune, Bishop of Hereford

Roger II of Sicily, king

Saladin, ruler of Egypt and Syria

Sancho I of Portugal, king

Sava, Saint, organizer and liberator of the Serbian Orthodox Church

Shao Yong, Chinese poet, historian, and philosopher

Sigurd I of Norway, king

Sigurd II of Norway, king

Stefan Nemanja, ruler of Serbia

Stefan Nemanjić, king of Serbia

Stephen II, king of Hungary

Stephen Harding, Saint, abbot, co-founder of the Cistercian Order

Stephen of England, king and Duke of Normandy

Suger, Abbot of St.-Denis

Suryavarman II, Khmer emperor

Sverker I of Sweden, king

Sverre of Norway, king

Sweyn III of Denmark

Tamar of Georgia, queen

Thomas Becket, Saint, Archbishop of Canterbury and Chancellor of England

Valdemar I of Denmark, the Great, king

Vladimir II Monomakh, prince of Kiev

Vladislav I Herman of Poland, king

William I of Scotland, the Lion, king

William I of Sicily, king

William Marshal, 1st Earl of Pembroke, knight and statesman

William of Malmesbury, English historian

Yue Fei, Chinese general

Yusuf ibn Tashfin, Almoravid ruler of North Africa and Spain

Zhang Zeduan, Chinese painter

Zhou Jichang, Chinese painter

Zhu Xi, Neo-Confucian Chinese philosopher

Zhu Yu, Chinese maritime author

5. In popular culture

A scene in the 2008 Tamil film Dasavathaaram shows the fictitious events of religious tensions between the Shaivists and the Vaishnavites in the Chola Kingdom (present-day Tamil Nadu, India).

6. References

7. Decades and years